--- Page 1 ---
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-66275-w
Underestimated accelerated Antarctic
phytoplankton net primary production in
winter over past decade from
spaceborne LiDAR
Peng Chen 1,2,8 , Zhenhua Zhang 1,2,8, Kelsey Bisson 3, Cédric Jamet 4,
Paolo Di Girolamo5, Davide Dionisi 6, Yongxiang Hu 7, Siqi Zhang 1,2 &
Delu Pan1,2
The Southern Ocean’s vital carbon sink is driven by phytoplankton Net Primary
Production (NPP). Winter phytoplankton seed spring alga lb l o o m sa n dr e g -
ulate nutrient cycling and ecosystem dynamics, yet Antarctic winter NPP
remains poorly constrained due to limi ted in situ data and passive satellite
sensor challenges in low-light, ice-covered conditions. Here, we leverage
spaceborne LiDAR (CALIOP), analyzing 16 years of data (16,236 tracks span-
ning 2006-2023), to reveal a signi ﬁcant, previously underestimated rise in
winter NPP, increasing by ~2.2 Tg C yr ⁻¹( P < 0.01). Enhanced coverage with
CALIOP boosts ice-free sea observations from 12.5% to 80.7%, exposing pro-
nounced NPP gains in the seasonal sea-ice zone, notably the Weddell and Ross
Seas, driven by declining sea ice, greater light penetration, and nutrient mix-
ing. These shifts, modulated by climate modes like the Southern Annular Mode
and El Niño-Southern Oscillation, highlight the Southern Ocean ’s escalating
role in global carbon dynamics. Integrating winter NPP into carbon models is
essential to reﬁne projections of polar carbon sequestration under climate
change.
The Southern Ocean plays a pivotal role in Earth ’s climate system,
acting as a major carbon sink 1–3 because of its high rates of phyto-
plankton net primary production (NPP). NPP refers to the conversion
of carbon dioxide (CO2) into organic carbon through photosynthesis,
which is then transferred through the marine food web or sequestered
in deep ocean waters, helping to store carbon and mitigate climate
change
4. The sensitivity of Southern Ocean phytoplankton to envir-
onmental changes, including ocean warming, wind speeds, limited
iron contents, and sea ice melting, makes the Southern Ocean a critical
area for studying the impacts of climate change on marine ecosystems
and global biogeochemistry
5–7.
Recent studies have highlighted the signi ﬁcant in ﬂuence of cli-
mate change on Southern Ocean phytoplankton, with rising tem-
peratures, shrinking sea ice, and alterations in ocean circulation
affecting their distribution and production. Speci ﬁcally, a warmer
ocean and atmosphere
8,9 and sea ice retreat 10–12 are reshaping the
Received: 9 May 2025
Accepted: 4 November 2025
Check for updates
1State Key Laboratory of Satellite Ocean Environment Dynamics, Second Institute of Oceanography, Ministry of Natural Resources, Hangzhou, China.
2Southern Marine Science and Engineering Guangdong Laboratory (Guangzhou), Nansha District, Guangzhou, China.3Department of Botany and Plant
Pathology, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR, USA.4Université Littoral Côte d’Opale, CNRS, Université Lille, IRD, Laboratoire d’Océanologie et de
Géosciences (LOG), Wimereux, France.5Dipartimento di Scienze della Salute, Università degli Studi della Basilicata, Via dell’Ateneo Lucano n.10,
Potenza, Italy.6Institute of Marine Sciences (ISMAR), Italian National Research Council (CNR), Rome - Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy.7NASA Langley Research
Center, Hampton, VA, USA.8These authors contributed equally: Peng Chen, Zhenhua Zhang.e-mail: chenp@sio.org.cn; sqzhang@sio.org.cn
Nature Communications|        (2025) 16:11430 1
1234567890():,;
1234567890():,;

--- Page 2 ---
timing and magnitude of phytoplankton blooms by in ﬂuencing the
wind strength, nutrient availability, light conditions13,14 and mixed layer
depth15–17, which are factors that affect phytoplankton blooms. These
regional shifts are often modulated by the Southern Annular Mode
(SAM), the dominant climate patte rn in the Southern Hemisphere. A
positive SAM trend has been shown to in ﬂuence phytoplankton com-
munities and production by altering physical drivers like mixed layer
depth, light availability, and sea ice cover
18–20.N o t a b l y ,ar e c e n t
intensiﬁcation of the SAM since 2010 has been linked to increased
phytoplankton biomass and longer blooms in the West Antarctic
Peninsula
21. These shifts in the timing and magnitude of phyto-
plankton blooms are particularly evident in austral summer, when
phytoplankton blooms grow in magnitude but terminate earlier
compared to previous decades, with signi ﬁcant trends in bloom
initiation and termination observed over the past 25 years
(1998–2022)
5. In the marginal ice zone to the west of the Antarctic
Peninsula, climate change is causing the timing of phytoplankton
blooms to shift, with increased chlorophyll-a concentrations ( Chla)
in fall and a decrease in bloom intensity in spring
22.A “greening” of
Chla in the Southern Ocean has been observed 23, similar to the
climate-driven trends observed in low-latitude regions 24, where the
timing and intensity of phytoplankton blooms have shifted as the
ocean has been subjected to warming, anthropogenic nutrient
inputs
25, and acidiﬁcation26. Over the past two to three decades, long-
term increases in Chla, with regional differences in phytoplankton
blooms, have also been observed via satellite-based observations 5,27.
However, in these observations, the critical role of wintertime pro-
duction, which enables early-season phytoplankton growth under
low-light conditions that support biomass buildup and sustain the
spring bloom
28,29, is often overlooked. This is primarily because the
passive ocean color remote sensing techniques depend on sunlight,
and existing approaches typically cannot capture data under low-
light conditions
30,31. Additionally, the presence of white caps —foam-
covered wave crests formed by wind —signiﬁcantly increases surface
reﬂectance, particularly during winter storms, further complicating
satellite observations32.
As i g n iﬁcant gap in the current understanding of NPP in the
Southern Ocean arises from this seasonal data limitation. Satellite-
based studies and shipborne observations have focused mostly on
summer
33,34, leaving the Antarctic winter months (June to August)
underrepresented. While biogeochemical (BGC)-Argo ﬂoats collect
some data in winter 29, their sparse coverage makes continuous long-
term observations challenging. The coverage rate of ocean color
remote sensing data, which are commonly used to estimate NPP
35,36,i n
ice-free sea areas of the Antarctic in winter is less than 15%, especially in
June and July, when the coverage rate is less than 1% (Fig. S1). However,
phytoplankton can still survive underneath sea ice even under extre-
mely low-light conditions, which are typical of the polar night
29,37–39—a
period in polar regions when the sun does not rise above the horizon
f o rw e e k so rm o n t h s .
To address this critical gap, we use spaceborne light detection and
ranging (LiDAR) active remote sensing technology, which has already
proven powerful in polar ocean detection because this technology
does not require sunlight and can provide extensive spatial
coverage
31,40–44. The effective coverage rate of cloud-aerosol LiDAR
with orthogonal polarization (CALIOP) in Antarctic winter is 6 to 7
times greater than that of moderate resolution imaging spectro-
radiometer (MODIS), and the use of CALIOP can increase the effective
coverage area from 12.5% to 80.7% (Fig. S1). Even in June, the coverage
rate of CALIOP is more than half of the sea ice-free ocean area, and the
coverage rates in July and August are both greater than 80%. However,
few studies used the spaceborne LiDAR data to retrieve chlorophyll
concentration or explore the dynamics of polar primary production. In
this study, CALIOP technology is utilized to retrieve winter phyto-
plankton data, offering a more complete picture of long-term trends,
full seasonal cycles and potential drivers of Antarctic phytoplankton
production.
The aim of this study is to address the critical gap in Antarctic NPP
by utilizing enhanced satellite-based techniques, ﬁlling the void of
winter observations. By incorporating CALIOP data from both the
winter and summer months, we generate a comprehensive monthly
dataset using spaceborne LiDAR, revealing a signi ﬁcant increase in
Antarctic winter NPP over the past decade. The study area covers the
Antarctic continental shelf and the seasonal sea-ice zone (SSIZ), the
area within the temporally average extent of sea ice, which is bounded
by the gray solid line in Fig. S1. This area is chose

--- Page 3 ---
using CALIOP data for a more detailed and comprehensive assessment
of NPP changes, especially in regions where sea-ice dynamics play a
critical role in primary production. The ability to capture ﬁner spatial
variability in NPP is a key strength of the CALIOP-based approach over
the MODIS data.
Temporal trends reveal a marked increase in winter NPP over the
study period (Fig. 1e ) .F r o m2 0 0 7t o2 0 2 2 ,t h ea n n u a lm e a nC A L I O P -
derived winter NPP is 54.5 ± 8.9 Tg C, which is six times greater than the
MODIS-derived NPP (8.5 ± 1.4 Tg C). A sharp acceleration in NPP is
observed in the later years (2012–2022), with an annual increase of 2.24
Tg C yr⁻¹ (R = 0.84, P < 0.01). This acceleration corresponds to ongoing
reductions in the extent of winter sea ice, as shown by the steady
decline in winter sea ice extent (Fig. 1e, red circles). In contrast, the
MODIS-derived NPP shows minimal changes over the same period,
underscoring the importance of active remote sensing technologies
for observing winter phytoplankton dynamics. Moreover, with the
completion of CALIOP data collection, the annual pan-Antarctic (i.e,
the entire Antarctic SSIZ) phytoplankton NPP calculated from 2007 to
2022 was 1022.8 ± 136.8 Tg C; without these data, the NPP estimated on
the basis of MODIS data alone would be underestimated by nearly 15%,
a substantial difference that suggests the importance of
CALIOP (Fig. S4).
Next, in an effort to verify the increasing trend, several additional
NPP models were investigated: the vertically generalized production
model (VGPM), carbon, absorption, and ﬂuorescence euphotic-
resolving (CAFE) model, and Eppley model. These models were
selected based on their ability to estimate NPP across different ocea-
nographic conditions. Evaluating multiple models allows for a more
robust validation of the increasing trend observed in winter NPP. The
data from all four models VGPM, CbPM, CAFE, and Eppley indicate a
Fig. 1 | Spatial and temporal variability in Antarctic winter net primary
production (NPP). a, c CALIOP-derived annual mean winter NPP distributions and
winter rates of NPP change (2007 –2022), respectively.b, d MODIS-derived annual
mean winter (June–July–August (JJA)) NPP distributions and winter rates of NPP
change (2007–2022), respectively. Gray represents the permanent ice zone in
winter. e Interannual trends in winter Antarctic NPP. The blue squares and
yellow–orange stars represent the CALIOP and MODIS-Aqua results, respectively.
The solid green and yellow-orange lines represent the CALIOP and MODIS linear
ﬁts, respectively, from 2007 to 2020. The dotted green line represents CALIOP ﬁt
from 2012 to 2022. The green and yellow –orange data and associated lines corre-
spond to the left vertical axis. The red circles show the average extent of sea ice in
winter, corresponding to the right vertical axis.
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-66275-w
Nature Communications|        (2025) 16:11430 3

--- Page 4 ---
clear increase in polar winter NPP, with the most signi ﬁcant increase
observed between 2012 and 2022. The CAFE model consistently esti-
mates the highest NPP, followed by the VGPM and CbPM, whereas a
more modest increase is obtained with the Eppley model (Fig. S5).
These trends highlight the increasing production in the polar regions,
particularly in winter. This ﬁnding aligns with the ﬁndings shown in
Fig. 1e, emphasizing that the winter NPP in the Southern Ocean has
increased substantially over the last decade.
Given that the CALIOP-derived results utilizes MODIS data for
training, biases present in the MODIS data
47,48 are likely to be propa-
gated in the ensuing CALIOP outputs and affect the resulting CALIOP
b
bp, Chla,a n dKd predictions, which in turn affects the accuracy of NPP
calculations. In addition, in-situ BGC-Argo data were used to validate
CALIOP-derived NPP. A total of 125 Argo ﬂoats and 5131 observation
proﬁles were deployed in the SSIZ from 2012 to 2023, with a seasonal
distribution of 583 proﬁles in winter (June-August), 579 in spring, 1968
in summer, and 2001 in autumn. Fig. 2a illustrates the spatial dis-
tribution of these pro ﬁles by season. The Argo NPP rate values were
derived by inputting the water parameters observed by the Argoﬂoats
into the CbPM model
49.T os p e c iﬁcally assess our model’s performance
during the critical, under-sampled winter period, we compared our
CALIOP NPP estimates exclusively against the wintertime Argo proﬁles
(Fig. 2b). Despite the relative sparsity of in-situ winter data, this tar-
geted validation reveals a good correlation providing con ﬁdence in
our model’s ability to retrieve NPP in the challenging low-light condi-
tions of the polar winter. A comprehensive validation across all sea-
sons, including individual plots for spring, summer, and autumn, is
provided in Supplementary Fig. S11 for a complete performance
assessment. Although there is some margin of error, the overall
agreement validates the use of CALIOP data for monitoring primary
production in polar regions, where in situ data are often limited.
Owing to the sparsity of the Argo data, we employ a 5°×4° grid
system to organize the Argo data on a monthly basis spatially. We then
analyzed the winter NPP trends in the Antarctic using these sparse
BGC-Argo data. Fig.2c shows a map of the spatial distribution of winter
observation frequencies within a 5°×4° grid system, revealing stark
disparities in data coverage across the Southern Ocean. While up to
eight observations were obtained in some grids, vast areas remain
poorly sampled, reﬂecting the logistical challenges of polar data col-
lection. Fig. 2dq u a n t iﬁes this sparsity, showing that fewer than ﬁve
winter observations were obtained in the majority of grids (5°×4°) in
the 2012 –2023 study period. Such limited coverage complicates
robust temporal or spatial analyses of NPP. Fig. 2es h o w st h ew i n t e r
NPP calculated in the grid with the highest observation frequency,
displaying a positive trend of winter NPP rate. Notably, this trend
mirrors CALIOP-LiDAR satellite-derived NPP estimates, validating the
consistency between in situ and remote sensing datasets. The align-
ment underscores the critical role of satellite technologies like CALIOP
in bridging observational gaps, particularly in remote polar regions
where traditional methods face limitations. Together, these results
highlight both the challenges of relying on sparse Argo data and the
value of integrating multiplatform approaches to advance under-
standing of Antarctic primary production dynamics.
Given that our CALIOP retrieval model was trained using MODIS
data, it is important to address the potential for data dependency and
validate our ﬁndings with an independent satellite sensor. To this end,
we conducted an independent analysis using data from the Visible
Infrared Imaging Radiometer Suite (VIIRS) sensor for the 2012 –2022
period, applying the same CbPM model to ensure a consistent com-
parison (see Supplementary Fig. S10 for the full seasonal trend com-
parison). The results show that the winter NPP trend derived from
VIIRS (0.4 TgC yr ⁻¹, P < 0.05) is highly consistent with the trend
observed from MODIS (0.3 TgC yr⁻¹, P < 0.05). While the absolute NPP
values from VIIRS are slightly lower than those from MODIS, the
remarkable consistency in the trends between these two independent
passive sensors conﬁrms the result obtained by this type of instrument
across all seasons. Crucially, both of these passive sensor trends are
more than ﬁve times smaller than the trend derived from CALIOP (2.2
TgC yr⁻¹, P < 0.05), providing strong independent evidence that pas-
sive ocean color remote sensing signi ﬁcantly underestimates the
recent acceleration of Antarctic winter NPP. This underscores the
necessity of active LiDAR measurements for capturing these critical
polar dynamics.
Distinct subregional trends and seasonal cycles
Building upon the overall analysis of polar winter NPP

--- Page 5 ---
Fig. 2 | Validation of CALIOP-derived NPP with biogeochemical (BGC)-
Argo data. aSpatial distribution of net primary production (NPP) derived from
BGC-Argo data in the seasonal sea-ice zone (SSIZ) from 2012 to 2023. b Scatter plot
comparing NPP estimates from BGC-Argo and CALIOP in winter. The black solid line
represents the linearﬁt, and the red dashed lines indicate the 95% prediction band.
c Spatial distribution of winter observation frequencies in a 5° × 4° grid derived
from BGC-Argo data (2012–2023). d Histogram of grid counts showing winter
observation frequencies, where most grids (5° × 4°) contain fewer than ﬁve obser-
vations, underscoring data scarcity.e NPP trend (mgC m
−²d ⁻¹) for the grid with the
highest observation frequency, revealing an upward trend. e The red squares
represent Argo data and the blue circles represent CALIOP data.
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-66275-w
Nature Communications|        (2025) 16:11430 5

--- Page 6 ---
importance of active remote sensing techniques, such as CALIOP, in
capturing production trends during the polar night that are otherwise
underestimated by passive remote sensing instruments, such
as MODIS.
Shifts in seasonal driver of Antarctic subregional NPP
To better understand the environmental drivers of NPP across Ant-
arctic subregions, we examined key oceanographic parameters that
inﬂuence primary production. Generally, sea surface temperature
(SST) plays a key role in regulating metabolic rates, which refers to the
rate at which organisms like phytoplankton grow and respire, and
stratiﬁcation, which is the layering of water masses in the ocean that
affects the mixing of nutrients between surface and deeper waters.
These factors in ﬂuence the timing and magnitude of phytoplankton
production peaks
51–53. Sea surface salinity (SSS) is another important
factor that in ﬂuences production by affecting water column stability
and nutrient mixing54. Low SSS can cause stronger strati ﬁcation, lim-
iting vertical mixing and nutrient transport to the surface, which
reduces production. Moreover, sea surface wind (SSW)-induced mix-
ing is a critical physical process that enhances vertical nutrient trans-
port, particularly in regions where upwelling occurs, and this process
contributes to the availability of nutrients essential for phytoplankton
growth
55. A greater mixed layer depth (MLD) enhances the supply of
nutrients from deeper waters to the surface, playing a vital role in
sustaining production in the Southern Ocean
56. Furthermore, sea ice
dynamics indicated by sea ice concentration (SIC), which refers to the
fraction of the ocean surface covered by sea ice, in ﬂuence light avail-
ability and nutrient mixing 57,58. The extent of sea ice signi ﬁcantly
affects the timing of phytoplankton blooms, as thinner ice allows more
light to penetrate, thus increasing production
53. In addition, key
Fig. 3 | Temporal trends and full seasonal cycles of net primary production
(NPP) in Antarctic subregions from 2007–2022. aAnnual NPP trends (Tg C) from
2007 to 2022 across ﬁve subregions of the Antarctic Ocean: the Weddell Sea (WS),
South Indian Ocean (SIO), Southwestern Paciﬁc Ocean (SPO), Ross Sea (RS), and
Bellingshausen–Amundsen (BAS). The solid lines represent NPP estimates derived
from CALIOP, and the dashed lines indicated linear trends. The slopes of the trends
are annotated in the legend. b Seasonal NPP variations in the Weddell Sea (WS).
c Subregion boundaries displayed on a polar stereographic map. The gray line
represents the seasonal sea ice zone (SSIZ). Seasonal NPP variations in (d) the South
Indian Ocean (SIO),e the Bellingshausen–Amundsen Sea (BAS),f the Ross Sea (RS),
and g the Southwestern Paciﬁc Ocean (SPO), highlighting the differences between
CALIOP (solid lines with circles) and MODIS (dashed lines with triangles). The gray
shading indicates the periods that are unavailable from the MODIS observations
due to the unavailability of sunlight. The dark and light gray bars in the top portions
of the graphs indicate that the trends in the corresponding months are statistically
signiﬁcant and insigniﬁcant at the 95% con ﬁdence level, respectively.
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-66275-w
Nature Communications|        (2025) 16:11430 6

--- Page 7 ---
nutrients, including nitrate (NO 3), phosphate (PO 4), dissolved silica
(DSi), and dissolved iron (DFe), are essential for phytoplankton
growth, and their availability drives production in the Southern
Ocean59.
Here we use random forest (RF) models to capture the contribu-
tions of these environmental par ameters and nutrients to the NPP in
the above-outlined Antarctic subregions. Through this model, the
seasonal variations in the contributions of the abovementioned
environmental parameters to NPP across Antarctic subregions were
investigated. We ﬁrst investigated the contributions of these para-
meters during austral winter, a period that was previously unexplored
due to the lack of winter NPP data in the Antarctic region. In the BAS
(Fig.4a), the key contributors to NPP are NO
3 (16%), SST (15%), and PO4
(15%), re ﬂecting the critical role of nutrients and temperature in
Fig. 4 | Drivers of seasonal and regional net primary production (NPP)variation.
Contribution ratios of environmental parameters (sea surface temperature (SST), sea
surface salinity (SSS), sea surface wind (SSW), mixed layer depth (MLD), sea ice con-
centration (SIC), nitrate (NO3), dissolved iron (DFe), phosphate (PO4), and dissolved
silica (DSi)) to NPP variation in thea Bellingshausen–Amundsen (BAS),b Ross Sea (RS),
c South Indian Ocean (SIO),d Weddell Sea (WS), and e Southwestern PaciﬁcO c e a n
(SPO) during austral wintertime (upper-left pie chart in each panel) and summertime
(lower-left pie chart in each panel) and trends in NPP and environmental parameters
(right half of each panel) during austral wintertime in the Antarctic subregions. Note:
the plus or minus signs on the pie charts ind icate positive or negative correlations,
respectively.f Map displaying the boundaries of theﬁve subregions analyzed: Weddell
Sea (WS), South Indian Ocean (SIO), Southwestern Paciﬁc Ocean (SPO), Ross Sea (RS),
and Bellingshausen–Amundsen (BAS).
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-66275-w
Nature Communications|        (2025) 16:11430 7

--- Page 8 ---
supporting limited production under thick ice cover, which supports
the moderate increase in NPP (2 Tg C yr ⁻¹) in the BAS. On the other
hand, in the RS (Fig. 4b), SIC (25%) is the dominant driver, along with
NO3 (13%) and DFe (13%), suggesting that the signi ﬁcant increase in
N P P( 5T gCy r ⁻¹) in the RS is driven by reduced SIC, which enhances
light penetration and improves light conditions. Similarly, in the SIO
(Fig. 4c), SIC (32%) and SSS (16%) are the primary contributors, with
NO
3 (10%) also playing a notable role. This underscores that the
moderate increase in NPP (4 Tg C yr ⁻¹) in the SIO is driven by SIC and
SSS, which inﬂuence water column stability and nutrient availability. In
the WS (Fig. 4d), DFe (33%), NO3 (16%), and PO4 (15%) are the dominant
drivers, suggesting that despite the limited light in this region, the
supply of essential nutrients is critical for sustaining low but persistent
phytoplankton growth in this iron-limited region
60.H o w e v e r ,ad i f -
ferent pattern is observed in the SPO (Fig.4e), where the SIC (23%), SST
(13%), SSS (19%) and MLD (11%) are the leading contributors. This
highlights the roles of physical mixing and heat ﬂux in driving pro-
ductivity during the polar night. SIC and SSS inﬂuence the stratiﬁcation
and stability of the water column, while SST and MLD are indicators of
the thermal and mixing conditions that affect nutrient availability and
light penetration. These factors, together, drive the production
despite the low light conditions in winter, which in ﬂuence the weaker
increase in NPP (1 Tg C yr⁻¹) in the SPO. Thus, during the austral winter,
physical factors are dominant because of limited sunlight and exten-
sive sea ice cover.
We next investigated the trends in these parameters during aus-
tral summer. In the BAS (Fig. 4a), DFe (37%), DSi (19%), and NO
3 (13%)
dominate, underscoring the importance of nutrient synergy (i.e., the
combined availability of multiple nutrients) in supporting high pro-
duction during this period. Similarly, in the RS (Fig.4b), DFe (22%), NO
3
(14%), and SIC (21%) are the major drivers, re ﬂecting the combined
inﬂuence of nutrient availability and sea ice-driven nutrient resupply.
DFe and NO ₃ directly contribute to phytoplankton growth by provid-
ing essential nutrients, whereas SIC plays a role in the seasonal
resupply of nutrients by inﬂuencing the movement and melting of sea
ice, which brings nutrients from deeper layers of the ocean to the
surface, enhancing nutrient availability during critical periods of pri-
mary production. In the SIO (Fig. 4c), the leading contributors are DSi
(23%), DFe (22%), NO
3 (20%), and PO 4 (20%), emphasizing the central
role of nutrient and trace metal availability. The availability of these
key nutrients, particularly DSi, DFe, and NO₃, supports phytoplankton
growth by providing essential resources for cellular processes. The WS
(Fig. 4d) shows a relatively balanced contribution from DFe (21%), NO
3
(20%), and PO 4 (18%), with DFe being the dominant driver. This sug-
gests that while iron plays a signiﬁcant role, the similar contributions of
nitrate and phosphate indicate that multiple nutrients are limiting
primary productivity in the region. In the SPO (Fig. 4e), SIC (38%), DFe
(20%), and MLD (13%) emerge as the key drivers, with sea ice coverage
and vertical mixing playing critical roles in enhancing nutrient avail-
ability during this period of elevated production. Thus, during austral
summer, nutrient availability is the predominant controller of NPP
across all regions, re ﬂecting heightened biological demand for nutri-
ents during the peak growing season. These nutrients provide the
essential resources for phytoplankton growth, and their availability
directly in ﬂuences NPP. The combined effect of DFe, nitrate, and
phosphate determines the overall nutrient supply, which is critical for
sustaining primary production during the peak growing season.
A clear seasonal contrast emerges from this analysis. In particular,
the results of the RF model underscore the distinct differences in the
importance of these drivers (environmental parameters) between
austral winter and summer, re ﬂecting the interplay of light, nutrient
availability, and sea ice dynamics. During winter, physical parameters
such as the SIC, SSS, SST, and MLD dominate by regulating light
availability and strati ﬁcation under harsh conditions. When water
temperature rises, the rate of photosynthesis may increase, which
could enhance the overall NPP in these areas
61. Additionally, ice melt or
extended melting periods lead to increased daylight hours, directly
stimulating phytoplankton growth
62. In summer, the biological
demand for nutrients such as DFe and NO 3, becomes the primary
control, reﬂecting a seasonal shift from physical to biological regula-
tion of production. This seasonal shift can lead to a negative correla-
tion between NPP and nutrient concentrations. As NPP increases
rapidly during summer blooms, ph

--- Page 9 ---
stronger westerly winds, which promotes the upwelling of warmer
subsurface waters, increases the salinity of surface waters, and weak-
ens strati ﬁcation. This process triggers deep convection, bringing
more subsurface warm, saline water to the surface, which leads to a
reduction in sea ice
70. This phenomenon aligns with the sharp increase
in NPP after 2014. Moreover, the SAM plays a critical role in driving
changes in the MLD and mesoscale eddy activity
71,72,w h i c hi nt u r n
affect nutrient distributions and ﬂuctuations in phytoplankton20.
Fig. 5 | Causal relationships between Antarctic net primary production (NPP)
and climatic/environmental factors and schematic diagram of the mechanisms
of Antarctic NPP trends. aAll pan Antarctic regions combined and b Weddell Sea
(WS), c South Indian Ocean (SIO), d Southwestern Paciﬁc Ocean (SPO), e Ross Sea
(RS), and f Bellingshausen–Amundsen (BAS) individual subregions. In panels
a–f the blue lines/arrows indicate positive causal in ﬂuences, whereas red lines/
arrows represent negative inﬂuences. The speciﬁct i m el a g s( i nm o n t h s )f o re a c h
causal relationship are detailed in Table S1.g Schematic diagram of the mechanisms
of Antarctic NPP trends in response to climate change.
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-66275-w
Nature Communications|        (2025) 16:11430 9

--- Page 10 ---
In addition to the SAM, other climatic factors, such as El
Niño–Southern Oscillation (ENSO), signiﬁcantly inﬂuence the Antarc-
tic marine environment through teleconnections, which refer to the
long-distance connections between climate phenomena in different
regions, and lagged effects
73, which describe the delayed response of
one variable to changes in another. The PCMCI+ algorithm results
reveal that tropical climate phenomena, such as the southern oscilla-
tion index (SOI) and ENSO, impact NPP indirectly through changes in
atmospheric and oceanic circulation (Fig. 5). ENSO events can alter
Southern Hemisphere wind patterns, affecting sea ice dynamics
73 in
Antarctic waters. ENSO generally inﬂuences the Antarctic climate and
sea ice distribution in two ways: (1) ENSO events, especially El Niño,
enhance convective activity in the tropical Paci ﬁc, triggering Rossby
waves in the atmosphere. These waves propagate toward the poles and
ultimately affect atmospheric circulation in the Antarctic region; (2)
ENSO events also excite the Paci ﬁc-South America (PSA) teleconnec-
tion pattern, an anomalous atmospheric circulation mode that causes
pressure anomalies in the South Paci ﬁca n dA n t a r c t i cr e g i o n s
74,75.
These lagged relationships, revealed by PCMCI+, suggest that tropical
climate anomalies can in ﬂuence Antarctic production several
months later.
As global climate warming progresses, its in ﬂuence on the Ant-
arctic ecosystem is becoming increasingly evident. The ongoing
reduction in sea ice extent, as seen in recent decades, has ampliﬁed the
role of winter NPP in contributing to overall carbon sequestration.
Fig. 5g illustrates the mechanisms underlying the trends in Antarctic
NPP in response to climate change. During the winter months,
reductions in SIC lead to increased photosynthetically active radiation
(PAR) that refers to the portion of sunlight that plants use for photo-
synthesis, which in turn enhances Chla and subsequently increases
NPP. In summer, a greater MLD provides greater access to nutrients,
fostering Chla growth and increasing NPP
76,77. Over long-term scales,
which in this study refers to periods greater than six months, changes
such as increases in Niño 3.4 and SST in the SIO further increase NPP
(Fig. 5c). These ﬁndings collectively highlight the complex interplay
between local environmental conditions and remote climate systems
in regulating Antarctic NPP, providing a crucial foundation for
understanding future changes in primary productivity under ongoing
climate change.
Ecological implications
The observed considerable increase in Antarctic winter NPP funda-
mentally alters our understanding of the role of the Southern Ocean in
global carbon cycling and ecosystem dynamics. Traditionally, Antarc-
tic winter has been considered a period of biological dormancy due to
extreme light limitations and extensive sea ice cover
29. However,
emerging evidence highlights winter NPP as a critical contributor to
carbon sequestration, ocean ‒atmosphere interactions, and biogeo-
chemical processes, thereby redeﬁning the Southern Ocean’sr o l ea sa
year-round carbon sink
78.T h i sﬁnding aligns with recent studies, which
demonstrate that photosynthesis can occur at extreme low light
levels
28. Enhanced winter NPP drives substantial production of parti-
culate organic carbon (POC), which is exported below the euphotic
zone via a biological pump, enabling long-term storage of atmospheric
CO
2 in the deep ocean 79. This process bolsters the Southern Ocean ’s
efﬁciency in offsetting anthropogenic CO 2 emissions, transforming it
into a more effective buffer against global climate change 80.T h e
concomitant reduction in the surface water partial pressure of CO 2
(pCO2) strengthens the air ‒sea CO 2 gradient, especially in ice ‒edge
regions where diminishing sea ice promotes greater gas exchange 81.
These ﬁndings underscore the previously underappreciated impor-
tance of winter processes in shaping global carbonﬂuxes, highlighting
the crucial role of Antarctic winter NPP in carbon sequestration and its
potential implications for future climate modeling and ecosystem
dynamics.
The ecological ramiﬁcations of increased winter NPP observed in
this study extend beyond carbon cycling, with the potential to reshape
the phytoplankton community structure and ecosystem impacts on
higher trophic levels. A sustained increase in winter biomass has the
potential to reshape the phytoplankton community structure that
overwinters and initiates the subsequent spring bloom. A shift in the
dominant cell size or species could alter trophic transfer efﬁciency and
hence higher trophic production and the community composition of
zooplankton and other predators
82,83. Increased winter production
may favor diatom propagation. While these cells contribute dis-
proportionately to POC export and biological pump efﬁciency
84,85,t h e y
are also a critical, high-quality food source for grazers like Antarctic
krill. Therefo

--- Page 11 ---
atmospheric anomalies inﬂuence zonal sea ice drift, nutrient resupply
and stratiﬁcation in the Southern Ocean 94,95, with lagged effects on
production96.T h e s e ﬁndings emphasize the interconnectedness of
global climate systems and the need for a holistic understanding of
how remote drivers interact with local processes to shape Antarctic
ecosystems.
As the Antarctic ecosystem has undergone rapid transformation
due to climate warming and sea ice loss 97, understanding the
mechanisms underlying winter NPP is essential for predicting future
changes in the global carbon cycle. The interplay of increased light
availability, nutrient dynamics, and community shifts highlights the
dynamic and evolving nature of Antarctic production
98. By utilizing
CALIOP for obtaining NPP data in winter and integrating full seasonal
cycle analyses into existing frameworks, this study provides a para-
digm for understanding Southern Ocean ecosystems under changing
climatic conditions. Future research should prioritize extreme climatic
events, such as marine heatwaves and anomalous wind patterns, which
could exacerbate or mitigate the observed trends. This knowledge is
critical not only for re ﬁning predictions of Antarctic ecosystem resi-
lience but also for assessing the Southern Ocean’sr o l ei nr e g u l a t i n gt h e
global climate and supporting biodiversity in an era of unprecedented
environmental change.
Methods
Data acquisition
Multiple data sources, including MODIS, CALIOP, and BGC-Argo
datasets, are used to investigate Antarctic NPP dynamics. The
MODIS-Aqua Level 3 9-km daily products including bbp, Chla,a n d Kd
available at https://oceancolor.gsfc.nasa.gov/, serve as key predictors.
MODIS data were strategically chosen to train our TBTS model because
both MODIS (on the Aqua satellite) and CALIOP (on the CALIPSO
satellite) are part of the A-Train constellation, with observation times
separated by only ~90 seconds. This near-simultaneous data acquisi-
tion is crucial for machine learning as it minimizes the temporal mis-
match between the LiDAR signal and the ocean color properties,
thereby reducing a signiﬁcant source of uncertainty in model training.
CALIOP Level-1B V4.1
99 and Level-2 Merged Layer V4.20 products are
used to acquire LiDAR-derived oceanographic parameters from 16,236
tracks spanning from 2006 to 2023. These data include backscatter
measurements and attenuated backscatter data, which are crucial for
understanding phytoplankton dynamics. These LiDAR parameters are
used to calculate K
d, Chla,a n d bbp, which are related to the distribu-
tions of photosynthetically active radiation and phytoplankton
carbon
34. Then they are integrated into the NPP model. The biogeo-
chemical Argo (BGC-Argo) dataset 100–102, which provides in situ mea-
surements, is used for model validation. This dataset includes direct
measurements of Chla and other biogeochemical parameters acces-
sible via the Argo Global Data Assembly Center (GDACs) at Ifremer
(ftp://ftp.ifremer.fr/ifremer/argo/).
The data sources for the evaluated parameters are as follows.
The Global Ocean OSTIA Sea Surface Temperature and Sea Ice
Reprocessed product (SST-GLO- SST-L4-REP-OBSERVATIONS-010-
011)
103 provides SST Level-4 data. The Multi Observation Global
Ocean Sea Surface Salinity and Sea Surface Density product
(MULTIOBS_GLO_PHY_S_SU RFACE_MYNRT_015_013)
104–106 provides
SSS Level-4 data. The Global Ocean Monthly Mean Sea Surface
Wind and Stress from Scatterometer and Model product
(WIND_GLO_PHY_CLIM ATE_L4_MY_012_003) provides SSW Level-4
data. The Multi Observation Global Ocean 3D Temperature
Salinity Height Geostrophic Current and MLD product
(MULTIOBS_GLO_PHY_TS UV_3D_MYNRT_015_012)
107,108 provides
MLD Level-4 data. Data on sea ice extent and concentration are
accessed from the Sea Ice Index extent data obtained from the
National Snow and Ice Data Center (NSIDC)
109.T h eG l o b a lO c e a n
Biogeochemistry Hindcast product from the Copernicus Marine
Environment Monitoring Service (CMEMS) provides Level-4 data
for key nutrients, including nitrate (NO 3), phosphate
(PO4), dissolved silica (DSi), and iron (DFe) (GLO-
BAL_MULTIYEAR_BGC_001_029). Data on the SAM are available
from Marshall ’sS A MI n d e xp a g e( https://legacy.bas.ac.uk/met/
gjma/sam.html ). Data on other climate indices in anomaly format
for the period of 1978 –2022 are available from the Global Climate
Observing System website ( https://psl.noaa.gov/data/timeseries/
month/). These indices include Niño 3.4, which tracks SST
anomalies in the equatorial Paci ﬁc region (5°S to 5°N, 170°W to
120°W)110; the SOI, which represents the normalized pressure
difference between Tahiti and Darwin 111; the Paci ﬁcD e c a d a l
Oscillation (PDO), which describes a long-term El Niño-like cli-
mate variability pa ttern in the Paci ﬁca t2 0 ° N
112;a n dt h ed i p o l e
mode index (DMI), which is de ﬁned by the anomalous SST gra-
dient between the western equatorial Indian Ocean (50°E to 70°E,
1

--- Page 12 ---
To eliminate the impact of sea ice on CALIOP observations in polar
regions, we selectively included data where δT less than 0.05, effec-
tively excluding areas with full or partial sea ice coverage, given that
sea ice tends to have a high depolarization ratio
44. We further ensured
data integrity by retaining only those measurements with integrated
attenuated backscatter values less than 0.017 sr ⁻¹, which indicates
clear atmospheric conditions118. Additionally, to reduce interference
from ocean surface phenomena such as foam and white caps, which
are prevalent at high wind speeds, and to prevent signal saturation at
low wind speeds, we included only data captured at wind speeds
between 2 m/s and 9 m/s
44,116.
Antarctic phytoplankton NPP derived from CALIOP
A two-branch-two-step (TBTS) model is used to derive Chla, bbp, Kd
f r o mt h eC A L I O Pd a t a( F i g .S 7 ) .T h ed e e pl e a r n i n gm o d e ld e v e l o p e di n
this study consists of two branches: a waveform branch and a physical
parameter branch. This structure leverages both deep learning tech-
niques and physical parameter inputs
120. Unlike traditional deep learn-
ing methods that rely solely on waveform data, this model incorporates
data on additional phys ical parameters, i.e., δ
T and βW , allowing for
more seamless and effective integration of physical and observational
data. By incorporating physical pa rameters as a second branch, the
model can better account for the underlying physical processes,
thereby improving its performance in oceanic LiDAR applications
40.
The waveform deep learning branch takes as input the corrected
parallel and vertical backscatter signals within a range of 5 bins above
and below the sea surface 40.S p e c iﬁcally, the input includes 22 vari-
ables derived from the CALIOP measurements. In the model, a con-
volutional neural network (CNN)
121 is used to automatically extract
features from these corrected signals. After processing through the
CNN layers, the data are ﬂattened into 128 features via fully connected
(FC) layers. The second branch of the model addresses physical
parameters, which form an integral part of the input for the network.
The physical parameters include δ
T and βW . These physical para-
meters are processed through FC layers for feature extraction. The
features from both branches are then combined through a con-
catenation layer and passed through another FC layer before per-
forming regression. The model uses Recti ﬁed Linear Units (ReLU)
activation functions throughout, except for the ﬁnal layer with linear
activation functions to retrieve the values of b
bp, Chla,a n d Kd.T h e
model is trained using the RMSprop optimization algorithm, which
divides the gradient by the average of its recent magnitudes
122.
To increase the accuracy of the model, a two-step approach is
applied to reconstructbbp, Chla,a n dKd based on the MODIS data. The
ﬁrst step involves the reconstruction of climatologies, which refer to
the monthly climatological mean values averaged over the period
2006–2023. The second step focuses on reconstructing anomalies
relative to the climatologies. This two-step approach is particularly
advantageous because it mitigates issues related to sparse observa-
tional coverage and accounts for seasonal variations driven by climate
change
123. The two steps are as follows.
Step 1: Reconstruction of climatologies:In this step, the two-branch
model reconstructs the normalized monthly climatologies for bbp,
Chla,a n d Kd as a nonlinear function of the normalized CALIOP wave-
form data ( βn), δT, n,a n d βW, n:
bbp, n, Chlan, Kd, n
/C16/C17
= TBNðβn, δT, n, βW, nÞð 6Þ
Step 2: Reconstruction of anomalies: In the second step, the model
reconstructs anomalies inbbp, Chla,a n d Kd as a nonlinear function of
the normalized waveform data and their respective anomalies:
bbp, anom, Chlaanom, Kd, anom
/C16/C17
=T B Nðβ, δT , βW , βanom, δT, anom, βW, anomÞ
ð7Þ
The anomalies are calculated as the difference between collo-
cated MODIS bbp, Chla,a n d Kd measurements and the climatologies
reconstructed in Step 1.
To increase model accuracy, all datasets are normalized to zero
mean and a unit standard deviation before training. This normalization
ensures that the ranges of all the predictors are comparable and pre-
vents predictors with greater variability from dominating the model
124.
During the training, MODIS bbp, Chla,a n d Kd data and CALIOP mea-
surements from 2006 to 2023 are used. The data are averaged along
9 km segments to align with the MODIS observations. The training
dataset includes approximately 10
6 match points per month, with 10 5
points in high-latitude regions, ensuring robust model performance in
polar areas. The data are randomly split, with 70% used for training,
15% for validation, and 15% for evaluation. This division ensures that the
data for evaluation remain separate from the training process, thereby
providing an unbiased assessment of the model ’sp e r f o r m a n c e 

--- Page 13 ---
more continuous and comprehensive NPP record across the
entire year.
It is important to acknowledge that by training our model with
MODIS data, its inherent biases are propagated into our results. To
formally assess this, we identi ﬁed three primary sources of error
contributing to the total uncertainty (E) of our CALIOP-derived pro-
ducts: measurement (M), representation (R), and prediction (P)
errors
129. The total uncertainty can be expressed as the root of the sum
of squares of these components: E =
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
M2 + R2 + P2
p
. The measurement
error (M) includes the combined uncertainties from the CALIOP input
variables and the MODIS reference data used for model training. The
representation error (R) arises from spatio-temporal mismatches
between observations and the model grid. Following established
methods, this error is assumed to be normally distributed with a bias of
0 on a large scale and is not included in the ﬁnal error budget. The
prediction error (P) is the inherent error of our TBTS model, as
determined from the validation dataset. Combining these compo-
nents, the total estimated uncertainty (E) for our CALIOP-derived
products (Chla, bbp and Kd) is approximately 30 ~ 35%
43,130.T h e s e
uncertainties propagate to the ﬁnal NPP estimates. As the CbPM is a
multiplicative model, the total uncertainty in our NPP estimates (ENPP )
can be approximated by the root sum of squares of the uncertainties
from our key inputs: ENPP =
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
E2
Chla + E2
bbp + E2
Kd
q
. This results in an
uncertainty for the ﬁnal NPP estimate of approximately 55%. It is cri-
tical to note that this substantial uncertainty primarily affects the
absolute magnitude of our NPP estimates. The central conclusion of
our study, however, is the accelerating trend in winter NPP. The cal-
culation of a linear trend is statistically robust against such random
errors in individual data points. Our con ﬁdence in the positive and
signiﬁcant trend is further bolstered by the consistent increasing
trends observed across four different NPP models (Supplementary
Fig. S5) and our independent validation using VIIRS data (Supple-
mentary Fig. S10).
Statistical analysis of potential factors and quantitative caus-
ality analysis
For the statistical analysis of potential factors in ﬂuencing Antarctic
NPP, we employed a random forest (RF) regression model to quantify
the relative contributions of different environmental factors, a method
successfully applied for analyzing drivers in environmental science
131.
This method allows for the assessment of nonlinear relationships
between predictor variables and NPP, providing a robust framework
for understanding how various factors such as temperature, salinity,
and nutrient availability, inﬂuence primary production in the Southern
Ocean. To provide a robust and unbiased assessment of feature
importance, we used the permutation-based method
132.T h i sm e t h o d
directly measures a feature’si m p a c to nt h em o d e l’s performance on an
unseen validation dataset, avoiding the potential biases of standard
impurity-based metrics. As originally described by ref. 133,t h e
importance of a single feature is calculated as the average decrease in
the model ’s performance score when the values of that feature are
randomly shufﬂed. This process was repeated multiple times for each
feature to ensure statistical stability. The resulting importance values
are normalized to ensure that they sum to 100%.
To further explore the causal relationships between Antarctic NPP
and various environmental factors, we utilized the PCMCI+ algorithm,
which is a powerful statistical method for detecting causal interactions
in multivariate time series data
64,65. PCMCI+ is a time series causal
discovery approach that efﬁciently identiﬁes causal links by testing for
conditional independence between variables134. In the method, ﬁrst, a
condition-selection step (PC) is applied to iteratively test for condi-
tional independence and identify the relevant conditions necessary for
establishing causal relationships. This step helps reduce the com-
plexity of the model, especially when handling many variables. In the
second step, momentary conditional independence (MCI) tests are
performed using a smaller set of selected conditions, helping to
address issues such as strong autocorrelation in time series data.
Partial correlation (ParCorr) calculations are used for conditional
independence testing in this analysis, focusing on linear relationships
between variables. The maximum time delay ( τ
max =1 2 ) i s c h o s e n t o
reﬂect teleconnection. The pruning hyperparameter (pc- α)i so p t i -
mized using the Akaike information criterion (AIC). PCMCI+ produces
p values for causal links between variables at different time lags, and in
this study, links were de ﬁned at a strict signi ﬁcance level of 0.05. This
approach offers a rigorous way to understand the complex interac-
tions in Antarctic ecosys

--- Page 14 ---
5. Thomalla, S. J., Nicholson, S.-A., Ryan-Keogh, T. J. & Smith, M. E.
Widespread changes in Southern Ocean phytoplankton blooms
linked to climate drivers.Nat. Clim. Change13,9 7 5–984 (2023).
6 . R y a n - K e o g h ,T .J . ,T h o m a l l a ,S .J . ,M o n t e i r o ,P .M .S .&T a g l i a b u e ,A .
Multidecadal trend of increasing iron stress in Southern Ocean
phytoplankton.Science 379,8 3 4–840 (2023).
7. Haumann, F. A., Gruber, N. & Münnich, M. Sea-ice induced
Southern Ocean subsurface warming and surface cooling in a
warming climate.AGU Adv.1, e2019AV000132 (2020).
8. Flexas, M. M., Thompson, A. F., Schodlok, M. P., Zhang, H. & Speer,
K. Antarctic Peninsula warming triggers enhanced basal melt rates
throughout West Antarctica.Sci. Adv.8, eabj9134 (2022).
9. Nakayama, Y., Menemenlis, D., Zhang, H., Schodlok, M. & Rignot,
E. Origin of circumpolar deep water intruding onto the Amundsen
and Bellingshausen sea continental shelves.Nat. Commun.9,
3403 (2018).
10. Hobbs, W. et al. Observational evidence for a regime shift in
summer Antarctic Sea Ice.J. Clim.37, 2263–2275 (2024).
11. Purich, A. & Doddridge, E. W. Record low Antarctic sea ice cov-
erage indicates a new sea ice state.Commun. Earth Environ.4,
314 (2023).
12. Raphael, M. N. & Handcock, M. S. A new record minimum for
Antarctic sea ice.Nat. Rev. Earth Environ.3,2 1 5–216 (2022).
13. Henley, S. F. et al. Changing biogeochemistry of the Southern
ocean and its ecosystem implications.Front. Mar. Sci.7, https://
doi.org/10.3389/fmars.2020.00581(2020).
14. Constable, A. J. et al. Climate change and Southern Ocean eco-
systems I: how changes in physical habitats directly affect marine
biota. Glob. Change Biol.20,3 0 0 4–3025 (2014).
15. Sallée, J.-B. et al. Summertime increases in upper-ocean stratiﬁ-
cation and mixed-layer depth.Nature 591,5 9 2–598 (2021).
16. Rozema, P. D. et al. Interannual variability in phytoplankton bio-
mass and species composition in northern Marguerite Bay (West
Antarctic Peninsula) is governed by both winter sea ice cover
and summer stratiﬁcation. Limnol. Oceanogr.62,2 3 5–252
(2017).
17. Deppeler, S. L. & Davidson, A. T.Southern ocean phytoplankton in
a changing climate.Front. Mar. Sci.4, https://doi.org/10.3389/
fmars.2017.00040(2017).
18. Zhang, Z. et al. Linkage of the physical environments in the
northern Antarctic Peninsula region to the Southern Annular Mode
and the implications for the phytoplankton production.Prog.
Oceanogr.188,1 0 2 4 1 6( 2 0 2 0 ) .
19. Greaves, B. L. et al. The Southern Annular Mode (SAM) in
ﬂuences
phytoplankton communities in the seasonal ice zone of the
Southern Ocean.Biogeosciences17, 3815–3835 (2020).
20. Noh, K. M., Lim, H.-G. & Kug, J.-S. Zonally asymmetric phyto-
plankton response to the Southern annular mode in the marginal
sea of the Southern ocean.Sci. Rep.11, 10266 (2021).
21. Ferreira, A. et al. Climate change is associated with higher phy-
toplankton biomass and longer blooms in the West Antarctic
Peninsula.Nat. Commun.15,6 5 3 6( 2 0 2 4 ) .
22. Turner, J. S. et al. Changing phytoplankton phenology in the
marginal ice zone west of the Antarctic Peninsula.Mar. Ecol. Prog.
Ser. 734,1 –21 (2024).
2 3 . D e lC a s t i l l o ,C .E . ,S i g n o r i n i ,S .R . ,K a r a k ö y l ü ,E .M .&R i v e r o - C a l l e ,
S. Is the Southern Ocean getting greener?.Geophys. Res. Lett.46,
6034–6040 (2019).
24. Cael, B. B., Bisson, K., Boss, E., Dutkiewicz, S. & Henson, S. Global
climate-change trends detected in indicators of ocean ecology.
Nature 619,5 5 1–554 (2023).
25. Duce, R. A. et al. Impacts of atmospheric anthropogenic nitrogen
on the open Ocean.Science 320,8 9 3–897 (2008).
2 6 . R i e b e s e l l ,U .&G a t t u s o ,J . - P .Lessons learned from ocean acid-
iﬁcation research.Nat. Clim. Change5,1 2–14 (2015).
2 7 . Y u ,S . ,B a i ,Y . ,H e ,X . ,G o n g ,F .&L i ,T .An e wm e r g e dd a t a s e to f
global ocean chlorophyll-a concentration for better trend detec-
tion. Front. Mar. Sci.10, https://doi.org/10.3389/fmars.2023.
1051619 (2023).
28. Hoppe, C. J. M. et al. Photosynthetic light requirement near the
theoretical minimum detected in Arctic microalgae.Nat. Com-
mun. 15, 7385 (2024).
29. Randelhoff, A. et al. Arctic mid-winter phytoplankton growth
revealed by autonomous proﬁlers. Sci. Adv.6, eabc2678 (2020).
30. Chen, W. et al. Review of airborne oceanic lidar remote sensing.
Intell. Mar. Technol. Syst.1, 10 (2023).
31. Behrenfeld, M. J. et al. Annual boom–bust cycles of polar phyto-
plankton biomass revealed by space-based lidar.Nat. Geosci.10,
118–122 (2017).
32. Dierssen, H. M. Hyperspectral measurements, parameterizations,
and atmospheric correction of whitecaps and foam from visible to
shortwave infrared for ocean color remote sensing.Front. Earth
Sci. 7, https://doi.org/10.3389/feart.2019.00014(2019).
33. Philibert, R., Waldron, H. & Clark, D. A geographical and seasonal
comparison of nitrogen uptake by phytoplankton in the Southern
Ocean. Ocean Sci.11,2 5 1–267 (2015).
3 4 . A r r i 

--- Page 15 ---
49. Yang, B. et al. In Situ estimates of net primary production in the
Western North Atlantic with argo proﬁling ﬂoats. J. Geophys. Res.
Biogeosci.126, e2020JG006116 (2021).
50. Jena, B. et al. Evolution of Antarctic Sea ice ahead of the record
low annual maximum extent in september 2023.Geophys. Res.
Lett. 51, e2023GL107561 (2024).
5 1 . I r w i n ,A .J .&F i n k e l ,Z .V .M i n i n gas e ao fd a t a :d e d u c i n gt h e
environmental controls of ocean chlorophyll.PLoS One3,
e3836 (2008).
52. Lheureux, A. et al. Bi-decadal variability in physico-
biogeochemical characteristics of temperate coastal ecosystems:
from large-scale to local drivers.Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser.660,
19–35 (2021).
53. Feng, J., Li, D., Zhang, J. & Zhao, L. Variations in and environmental
controls of primary productivity in the Amundsen Sea.Biogeosci.
Discuss.2021,1 –44 (2021).
54. Gholizadeh, M. H., Melesse, A. M. & Reddi, L. A comprehensive
review on water quality parameters estimation using remote
sensing techniques.Sensors 16,1 2 9 8( 2 0 1 6 ) .
55. Ellison, E., Mazloff, M. & Mashayek, A. The rapid response of
southern ocean biological productivity to changes in background
small scale turbulence.J. Geophys Res: Oceans129,
e2024JC021158 (2024).
56. Flynn, R. F. et al. Summertime productivity and carbon export
potential in the Weddell Sea, with a focus on the waters adjacent
to Larsen C Ice Shelf.Biogeosciences18,6 0 3 1–6059 (2021).
57. Smith Jr., W. O. & Comiso, J. C. Inﬂuence of sea ice on primary
production in the Southern Ocean: a satellite perspective.J.
Geophys. Res. Oceans113, https://doi.org/10.1029/
2007JC004251(2008).
58. Kumar, A., Dwivedi, S. & Rajak, D. R. Ocean sea-ice modelling in
the Southern Ocean around Indian Antarctic stations.J. Earth Syst.
Sci. 126,7 0( 2 0 1 7 ) .
59. Moore, C. M. et al. Processes and patterns of oceanic nutrient
limitation.Nat. Geosci.6,7 0 1–710 (2013).
6 0 . A l d e r k a m p ,A .C . ,B a a r ,H .J .W .D . ,V i s s e r ,C .R .J .W .&A r r i g o a ,K .R .
Can photoinhibition control phytoplankton abundance in deeply
mixed water columns of the Southern Ocean?.Limnol. Oceanogr.
55,1 2 4 8–1264 (2010).
61. Boyd, P. W. et al. Marine phytoplankton temperature versus
growth responses from polar to tropical waters– outcome of a
scientiﬁc community-wide study.PLoS One8,e 6 3 0 9 1( 2 0 1 3 ) .
62. Hague, M. & Vichi, M. Southern Ocean biogeochemical argo
detect under-ice phytoplankton growth before sea ice retreat.
Biogeosciences18,2 5–38 (2021).
63. Marshall, G. J. Trends in the Southern Annular mode from obser-
vations and reanalyses.J. Clim.16,4 1 3 4–4143 (2003).
6 4 . N o w a c k ,P . ,R u n g e ,J . ,E y r i n g ,V .&H a i g h ,J .D .C a u s a ln e t w o r k sf o r
climate model evaluation and constrained projections.Nat.
Commun. 11, 1415 (2020).
65. Krich, C. et al. Estimating causal networks in biosphere–atmosphere
interaction with the PCMCI approach.Biogeosciences17,1 0 3 3–1061
(2020).
66. Lenton, A. & Matear, R. J. Role of the southern annular mode (SAM)
in Southern Ocean CO2 uptake.Glob. Biogeochem. Cycle21,
https://doi.org/10.1029/2006GB002714(2007).
67. Perren, B. B. et al. Southward migration of the Southern Hemi-
sphere westerly winds corresponds with warming climate over
centennial timescales.Commun. Earth Environ.1, 58 (2020).
68. Boschat, G., Purich, A., Rudeva,I. & Arblaster, J. Impact of zonal
and meridional atmosphericﬂow on surface climate and extremes
in the Southern Hemisphere.J. Clim.36,5 0 4 1–5061 (2023).
69. Verfaillie, D. et al. The circum-Antarctic ice-shelves respond to a
more positive Southern Annular mode with regionally varied
melting.Commun. Earth Environ.3, 139 (2022).
70. Morioka, Y. et al. Antarctic sea ice multidecadal variability trig-
g e r e db yS o u t h e r nA n n u l a rM o d ea n dd e e pc o n v e c t i o n .Commun.
Earth Environ.5, 633 (2024).
7 1 . S c r e e n ,J .A . ,G i l l e t t ,N .P . ,K a r p e c h k o ,A .Y .&S t e v e n s ,D .P .M i x e d
layer temperature response to the Southern annular mode:
mechanisms and model representation.J. Clim.23,
664–678 (2010).
72. Sen Gupta, A. & England, M. H. Coupled ocean–atmosphere–ice
response to variations in the Southern annular mode.J. Clim.19,
4457–4486 (2006).
73. Yuan, X. ENSO-related impacts on Antarctic sea ice: a synthesis of
phenomenon and mechanisms.Antarct. Sci.16,4 1 5–425 (2004).
74. Dou, J. & Zhang, R. Impact of sea surface temperature in the
extratropical southern Indian Ocean on Antarctic Sea Ice in Austral
spring. J. Clim.36,8 2 5 9–
8275 (2023).
75. Dou, J. & Zhang, R. Weakened relationship between ENSO and
Antarctic sea ice in recent decades.Clim. Dyn.60,
1313–1327 (2023).
76. Buchovecky, B. et al. Potential predictability of the spring bloom in
the Southern Ocean Sea ice zone.Geophys Res Lett.50,
e2023GL105139 (2023).
7 7 . A r t e a g a ,L .A . ,B o s s ,E . ,B e h r e n f e l d ,M .J . ,W e s t b e r r y ,T .K .&S a r -
miento, J. L. Seasonal modulation of phytoplankton biomass in the
S

--- Page 16 ---
91. Castro de la Guardia, L. et al. Assessing the role of high-frequency
winds and sea ice loss on arctic phytoplankton blooms in an ice-
ocean-biogeochemical model.J. Geophys. Res. Biogeosci.124,
2728–2750 (2019).
9 2 . K n o l l ,L .B . ,F r y ,B . ,H a y e s ,N .M .&S a u e r ,H .M .R e d u c e ds n o wa n d
increased nutrients show enhanced ice-associated photo-
autotrophic growth using a modiﬁed experimental under-ice
design. Limnol. Oceanogr.69,2 0 3–216 (2024).
93. Barber, D. G. et al. Consequences of change and variability in sea
ice on marine ecosystem and biogeochemical processes during
the 2007–2008 Canadian International Polar Year program.Clim.
Change 115,1 3 5–159 (2012).
94. Wang, J. et al. The impacts of combined SAM and ENSO on sea-
sonal Antarctic sea ice changes.J. Clim.36,3 5 5 3–3569 (2023).
95. Risaro, D. B., Chidichimo, M. P. & Piola, A. R. Interannual variability
and trends of sea surface temperature around Southern South
America.Front. Mar. Sci.9, https://doi.org/10.3389/fmars.2022.
829144 (2022).
96. Kim, H. & Ducklow, H. W. A Decadal (2002–2014) analysis for
dynamics of heterotrophic bacteria in an Antarctic Coastal eco-
system: variability and physical and biogeochemical forcings.
Front. Mar. Sci.3, https://doi.org/10.3389/fmars.2016.
00214 (2016).
97. Meredith, M. P. & King, J. C. Rapid climate change in the ocean
west of the Antarctic Peninsula during the second half of the 20th
century.Geophys. Res. Lett.32, https://doi.org/10.1029/
2005GL024042(2005).
98. Biggs, T. E. G. et al. Control of Antarctic phytoplankton community
composition and standing stock by light availability.Polar Biol.45,
1635–1653 (2022).
99. Getzewich, B. J. et al. CALIPSO lidar calibration at 532nm: version
4 daytime algorithm.Atmos. Meas. Tech.11,6 3 0 9–6326 (2018).
1 0 0 . W o n g ,A .P .S .e ta l .A r g od a t a1 9 9 9–2019: two million
temperature-salinity proﬁles and subsurface velocity observa-
tions from a global array of proﬁling ﬂoats. Front. Mar. Sci.7,
https://doi.org/10.3389/fmars.2020.00700(2020).
101. Claustre, H., Johnson, K. S. & Takeshita, Y. Observing the global
ocean with biogeochemical-argo.A n n u .R e v .M a r .S c i .12,
23–48 (2020).
102. Johnson, K. & Claustre, H. Bringing biogeochemistry into the Argo
age. Eos, Transactions American Geophysical Union, https://doi.
org/10.1029/2016EO062427(2016).
103. Good, S. et al. The current conﬁguration of the OSTIA system for
operational production of foundation sea surface temperature
and ice concentration analyses.Remote Sens.12, 720 (2020).
104. Droghei, R., Buongiorno Nardelli, B. & Santoleri, R. A new global
sea surface salinity and density dataset from multivariate obser-
vations (1993–2016). Front. Mar. Sci.5, https://doi.org/10.3389/
fmars.2018.00084(2018).
105. Droghei, R., Nardelli, B. B. & Santoleri, R. Combining in situ and
satellite observations to retrieve salinity and density at the ocean
surface.J. Atmos. Ocean. Technol.33,1 2 1 1–1223 (2016).
106. Buongiorno Nardelli, B., Droghei, R. & Santoleri, R. Multi-
dimensional interpolation of SMOS sea surface salinity with sur-
face temperature and in situ salinity data.Remote Sens. Environ.
180,3 9 2–402 (2016).
1 0 7 . M u l e t ,S . ,R i o ,M .H . ,M i g n o t ,A . ,G u i n e h u t ,S .&M o r r o w ,R .An e w
estimate of the global 3D geostrophic ocean circulation based on
satellite data and in-situ measurements.Deep Sea Res. Part II77-
80,7 0–81 (2012).
108. Guinehut, S., Dhomps, A. L., Larnicol, G. & Le Traon, P. Y. High
resolution 3-D temperature and salinityﬁelds derived from in situ
and satellite observations.Ocean Sci.8,8 4 5–857 (2012).
109. Fetterer, F., Knowles, K., Meier, W., Savoie, M. & Windnagel, A.
(NSIDC, 2017).
110. Rayner, N. A. et al. Global analyses of sea surface temperature, sea
ice, and night marine air temperature since the late nineteenth
century.J. Geophys. Res. Atmos. 108, https://doi.org/10.1029/
2002JD002670(2003).
111. Ropelewski, C. F. & Jones, P.D. An extension of the Tahiti–Darwin
Southern Oscillation Index.Mon. Weather Rev.115,2 1 6 1–2165
(1987).
112. Mantua, N. J., Hare, S. R., Zhang, Y., Wallace, J. M. & Francis, R. C. A
paciﬁc interdecadal climate oscillation with impacts on salmon
production*.Bull. Am. Meteorol. Soc.78,1 0 6 9–1080 (1997).
113. Saji, N. H. & Yamagata, T. Possible impacts of Indian Ocean Dipole
mode events on global climate.Clim. Res.25,1 5 1–169 (2003).
114. Winker, D. M. et al. Overview of the CALIPSO mission and CALIOP
data processing algorithms.
J. Atmos. Ocean. Technol.26,
2310–2323 (2009).
115. Lu, X. et al. Enabling value added scientiﬁc applications of ICESat-
2 data with effective removal of afterpulses.Earth Space Sci.8,
e2021EA001729 (2021).
116. Lu, X., Hu, Y., Trepte, C., Zeng, S. & Churnside, J. H. Ocean sub-
surface studies with the CALIPSO spaceborne lidar.J. Geophys.
Res. Oceans119,4 3 0 5–4317 (2014).
117. Lu, X. et al. New Ocean Subsurface optical properties from space
lidars: CALIOP/CALIPSO and ATLAS/ICESat

--- Page 17 ---
131. Liu, D. et al. Substantial increase of organic carbon storage in
Chinese lakes.Nat. Commun.15,8 0 4 9( 2 0 2 4 ) .
1 3 2 . G r e g o r u t t i ,B . ,M i c h e l ,B .&S a i n t - P i e r r e ,P .C o r r e l a t i o na n d
variable importance in random forests.Stat. Comput.27,
659–678 (2017).
133. Breiman, L. Random forests.Mach. Learn.45,5 –32 (2001).
1 3 4 . R u n g e ,J . ,N o w a c k ,P . ,K r e t s c h m e r ,M . ,F l a x m a n ,S .&S e j d i n o v i c ,D .
Detecting and quantifying causal associations in large nonlinear
time series datasets.Sci. Adv.5, eaau4996 (2019).
Acknowledgements
We gratefully acknowledge the NASA Ocean Biology Processing Group
(OBPG) for maintaining and distributing MODIS products and
biogeochemical-Argo data from the Argo Data Assembly Center. We
thank GDAC for providing Argo data. These data were collected and
made freely available by the International Argo Program and the national
programs that contribute to it. (https://argo.ucsd.edu, https://www.
ocean-ops.org). The Argo Program is part of the Global Ocean Observing
System. This study has been conducted using E.U. Copernicus Marine
Service Information;https://doi.org/10.48670/moi-00168; https://doi.
org/10.48670/moi-00051; https://doi.org/10.48670/moi-00181; https://
doi.org/10.48670/moi-00052; https://doi.org/10.48670/moi-00019.T h i s
study was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China
(Grant #42322606, P.C.; Grant #42276180, P.C.; Grant #W2521002, P.C.),
Zhejiang Provincial Natural Science Foundation (Grant # LZ25D060001,
P.C.), National Key Research and Development Program of China (Grant
#2022YFB3901703, P.C.; Grant #2022YFB3902603, P.C.).
Author contributions
P.C. and Z.Z. conceived the study and prepared the original manuscript.
Z.Z., S.Z., and D.P. provided parts of the data. K.B., C.J., P.G., D.D., and
Y.H. prepared and/or revised the manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Supplementary informationThe online version contains
supplementary material available at
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-66275-w.
Correspondenceand requests for materials should be addressed to
Peng Chen or Siqi Zhang.
Peer review informationNature Communicationsthanks S. Lan Smith
and the other anonymous reviewer(s) for their contribution to the peer
review of this work. A peer reviewﬁle is available.
Reprints and permissions informationis available at
http://www.nature.com/reprints
Publisher’s noteSpringer Nature remains neutral with regard to jur-
isdictional claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
Open AccessThis article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License,
which permits any non-commercial use, sharing, distribution and
reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate
credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the
Creative Commons licence, and indicate if you modiﬁed the licensed
material. You do not have permission under this licence to share adapted
material derived from this article or parts of it. The images or other third
party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative
Commons licence, unless indicatedotherwise in a credit line to the
material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons
licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or
exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly
from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visithttp://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2025
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-66275-w
Nature Communications|        (2025) 16:11430 17

