--- Page 1 ---
Zhang et al., Sci. Adv. 11, eaea0024 (2025)     5 November 2025
ScieNce Adv ANceS  |  ReSeAR ch AR ticle
1 of 12
OCEANOGRAPHY
Substantially underestimated winter CO2 sources of the 
Southern Ocean
Siqi Zhang1,2†, Peng Chen1,2*†, Kelsey Bisson3, Cédric Jamet4, Paolo Di Girolamo5, Davide Dionisi6, 
Y ongxiang Hu7, Zhenhua Zhang1,2*, Kun Shi8*, Delu Pan1,2
The size and control mechanism of the Southern Ocean’s carbon fluxes remain highly uncertain due to sparse 
winter observations. Here, we integrate satellite light detection and ranging (LIDAR) measurements with machine 
learning to assess the Southern Ocean air- sea CO2 fluxes between 2007 and 2020. We reveal that CO2 outgassing 
south of 50°S was underestimated by up to 40% in previous studies. While the midlatitude Southern Ocean (30° to 
50°S) strengthens as a carbon sink, the high- latitude region (50° to 90°S) shows Southern Annular Mode (SAM)–
modulated alternation between uptake and outgassing. The air- sea CO2 partial pressure difference (ΔpCO2) increas-
ingly dominates flux variability over wind- driven transfer velocity. We propose a framework involving three latitudinal 
loops with differing pCO2 controls: (i) Antarctic (salinity/sea ice), (ii) polar front (atmospheric CO2/chlorophyll), and 
(iii) subpolar (sea surface temperature/CO2). The findings underscore the winter processes’ critical role and neces-
sitate year- round observations to understand Southern Ocean’s global carbon cycle impact.
INTRODUCTION
The Southern Ocean (south of 35°S) plays a pivotal role in the glob-
al carbon cycle, accounting for ~40% of the ocean’s anthropogenic 
CO2 uptake ( 1–3) and serving as a critical regulator of Earth’s cli-
mate system (4, 5). Despite its critical role, the Southern Ocean ex-
hibits the largest uncertainties in global estimates of air- sea CO 2 
fluxes (6–8). This uncertainty originates principally from a critical 
scarcity of direct oceanic fugacity of CO2 (fCO2) measurements, ex-
acerbated by the severely restricted ship access during austral winter 
(9–11). While autonomous platforms mitigate winter undersampling 
locally, achieving sufficient observational coverage across this vast 
region necessitates complementation by synoptic- scale approaches—
notably, numerical modeling and satellite remote sensing. Never -
theless, both approaches are constrained by fundamental limitations 
in the Southern Ocean’s unique physical regime.
Contemporary ocean carbon- cycle models frequently overempha-
size thermally driven CO2 partial pressure (pCO2) variability while 
inadequately capturing observed seasonal fluctuations dominated by 
biological and physical drivers ( 12–16). Compounding these chal-
lenges, traditional passive ocean color remote sensing, which is essen-
tial for quantifying biological carbon uptake, becomes observationally 
unusable during high- latitude winters due to extended polar dark-
ness and persistent cloud cover (17). This necessitates a reliance on 
gap- filled CO2 flux products derived from interpolation or climato-
logical means, rather than direct observations, thereby compounding 
uncertainties precisely when in situ constraints are minimal. The ob-
servational blindness of traditional methods during winter consti-
tutes a fundamental barrier to resolving the Southern Ocean carbon 
cycle, a gap that the light detection and ranging (LIDAR) technolo-
gy used in this study is uniquely capable of addressing.
Compounding these observational and modeling challenges, 
Southern Ocean air- sea CO2 flux variability is orchestrated through a 
tight coupling of dynamic processes: Large- scale atmospheric forcing, 
dominated by the Southern Annular Mode (SAM), modulates westerly 
wind intensity and position. Positive SAM phases drive poleward-  
shifted, intensified winds that enhance upwelling of preindustrial car-
bon reservoirs, thereby amplifying natural CO2 outgassing across the 
subpolar Antarctic zone (18, 19). Ocean dynamics—notably, stratifica-
tion shifts and temperature anomalies driven by broad climate modes 
or regional forcings—additionally regulate fluxes by modifying vertical 
mixing regimes and suppressing anthropogenic CO2 absorption effi-
ciency (20). Although seasonal phytoplankton blooms draw down sur-
face pCO2 biologically, their contribution to secular CO2 flux trends is 
subordinate to dominant physical drivers and exhibits diminished 
multidecadal persistence (21). Disentangling the integrated effects of 
these interdependent physical- biogeochemical couplings, particularly 
the winter mixing/light availability/summer productivity feedback cas-
cade, poses persistent challenges for climate models, compounding 
uncertainty where observational benchmarks are sparse.
Breakthroughs in spaceborne LIDAR technology now enable un-
precedented year- round monitoring of the Southern Ocean carbon 
cycle, overcoming critical observational gaps during polar winters 
(22–25). Spaceborne LIDAR circumvents polar winter limi

--- Page 2 ---
Zhang et al., Sci. Adv. 11, eaea0024 (2025)     5 November 2025
ScieNce Adv ANceS  |  ReSeAR ch AR ticle
2 of 12
systematic biases in legacy flux estimates induced by winter sampling 
gaps, while elucidating the dominant spatiotemporal heterogeneity of 
carbon exchange mechanisms across this climate- critical region.
RESUL TS AND DISCUSSION
Substantial underestimation of the winter CO2 source
Our LIDAR- derived year- round CO2 flux assessments (Fig. 1) re-
solve distinct seasonal heterogeneity across Southern Ocean lati-
tudes and quantify a 39.8% (±11%) underestimation of winter CO2 
outgassing inherent in traditional observation methods. Within 
the midlatitude band (30° to 50°S), monthly fluxes exhibit a pro-
nounced unimodal seasonal pattern (Fig. 1A), characterized by (i) 
accelerated CO2 uptake during early winter (May to July), (ii) tran-
sient attenuation in early spring (August to October), and (iii) resur-
gent sequestration commencing in February. This regime establishes 
thermodynamic controls on solubility- driven CO2 influx as the dom-
inant sequestration mechanism.
In stark contrast, high- latitude regions (50° to 90°S) exhibit fun-
damentally distinct seasonality (Fig. 1C), transitioning from a weak-
ening carbon sink (February to June) to a persistent CO 2 source 
(June to October). Peak outgassing diminishes after September, 
yielding to resurgent carbon sequestration mediated by late- spring 
phytoplankton blooms. This culminates in maximum sequestra-
tion (−6.2 × 108 g of C/month) during January to February (Fig. 1D), 
establishing biologically driven processes as the primary control on 
high- latitude carbon cycling, demonstrating a marked departure from 
midlatitude thermodynamics- dominated regimes (31,  32); specifi-
cally, variations in surface- ocean pCO2 stemming from changes in 
dissolved inorganic carbon (DIC) and alkalinity are largely governed 
by biological activity and physical transport and mixing.
The winter data void proves critical for Southern Ocean carbon 
budgeting (Fig. 1C). Traditional passive sensors [e.g., Moderate Res-
olution Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS)–Aqua] fail during 
polar darkness, with valid observations plummeting to <50% in July 
and  <30% in August (Fig.  1G), precisely when active LIDAR 
[Cloud- Aerosol LIDAR with Orthogonal Polarization (CALIOP)] 
maintains 63.7% coverage in ice- free zones (versus 18.7% for MO -
DIS). These gaps spatially align with key CO2 source regions (Fig. 1, 
E and F), creating systematic biases. Our LIDAR- constrained flux 
estimates (Fig. 1C, green line) reveal that traditional methods (pur-
ple reconstruction) underestimate winter outgassing by 40% south 
of 50°S (fig. S2F), although this represents just 8% of annual uptake 
(fig. S2E). The bias concentrates in 51° to 63°S, strongly correlated 
with (i) asymmetric sea ice retreat (Pacific sector dominance; fig. S2, 
A to D) and (ii) the 2018+ regime shift from winter source to sink 
(fig.  S2, E and F). This undetectable sampling bias, intrinsically 
linked to cryosphere- atmosphere- carbon coupling, underscores the 
necessity for year- round active remote sensing to resolve climate- 
critical winter processes.
Shifting to interannual variations, our LIDAR- inclusive dataset 
reveals a notable strengthening of the Southern Ocean CO 2 sink 
from 2007 to 2020, albeit with distinct characteristics across lati-
tudes. The midlatitude band (30° to 50°S) acts as a persistently in-
tensifying sink, showing a steady increase in annual CO 2 uptake 
over the 14- year period (Fig. 1B). The high- latitude region (50° to 
90°S) also exhibits an overall strengthening sink, but its trajectory is 
marked by far greater year- to- year variability, with temporary de-
clines in uptake or enhanced outgassing in certain years (Fig. 1D). 
Critically, incorporating the previously missed winter outgassing 
(comparing the “total” versus “winter missing” lines in Fig. 1D) slightly 
dampens the overall rate of this sink intensification. This highlights 
the finding that a full seasonal accounting is essential not only for 
assessing the mean state but also for accurately quantifying long- term 
trends in this climate- critical region.
In conclusion, while the Southern Ocean CO 2 sink has intensi-
fied over the past 14 years, our analysis, which integrates LIDAR’s 
unique winter observational capability, reveals contrasting seasonal 
mechanisms across latitudes and demonstrates that accurately cap-
turing the magnitude of winter CO 2 outgassing is essential. The 
~40% underestimation of this high- latitude winter source due to 
previous observational gaps significantly biases our understanding 
of the high- latitude region’s carbon dynamics and its overall role in 
the global carbon budget.
Winter- resolved fluxes reveal a mosaic of latitudinal and 
sectoral carbon dynamics
Having established the overall temporal trends and the critical im-
pact of winter outgassing, we now use our year- round d

--- Page 3 ---
Zhang et al., Sci. Adv. 11, eaea0024 (2025)     5 November 2025
ScieNce Adv ANceS  |  ReSeAR ch AR ticle
3 of 12
Fig. 1. Impact of winter observational gaps on Southern Ocean air- sea CO2 flux estimates (2007–2020). (A and B) Mean monthly (A) and total annual (B) integrated 
cO2 flux for the midlatitude zone (30° to 50°S). (C and D) Mean monthly (c) and total annual (d) integrated cO2 flux for the high- latitude zone (50° to 90°S). in all line plots, 
green lines (“total”) are flux estimates from our year- round, lidAR- inclusive dataset. Purple lines (“winter missing”) are from a simulated dataset that mimics the winter 
data gaps of traditional passive sensors. Negative values indicate ocean uptake (a stronger sink). the separation between the “total” and “winter missing” lines is mainly 
concentrated during June to October, corresponding to the high- latitude winter. (E) Map of the mean annual air- sea cO2 flux density from our “total” analysis. (F) Map 
identifying regions of persistent winter data loss for passive sensors (gray shading, “winter lost”) and the perennial sea ice zone. the red outline in (e) denotes the “winter 
lost” area from (F). (G) Winter observation coverage for active (cAliOP) versus passive (MOdiS) sensors. together, the panels demonstrate that winter data gaps [(G) and 
(F)] lead to a substantial underestimation of cO2 outgassing [divergence between lines in (c)], a bias corrected by lidAR.
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Nanjing Institute of Geography & Limnology on May 07, 2026


--- Page 4 ---
Zhang et al., Sci. Adv. 11, eaea0024 (2025)     5 November 2025
ScieNce Adv ANceS  |  ReSeAR ch AR ticle
4 of 12
(wind speed–dependent turbulent gas exchange) and dp (thermody-
namic forcing and surface ocean biogeochemical forcing), which 
exhibit distinct spatiotemporal signatures. The air- sea CO2 exchange 
is primarily controlled by the gas transfer velocity (kw) and the con-
centration gradient dynamics at the air- sea interface, as indicated by 
dp variations.
While pressure difference forcing (d p) governs flux magnitude 
across most Southern Ocean regimes, turbulent gas exchange (k w) 
emerges as the principal control within a circumpolar band (∼45° to 
60°S). The k w- dominated belt coincides with the Southern Ocean’s 
wind- stress maximum yet functions as a biogeochemical pivot; its 
characteristically weak mean d p renders carbon fluxes dispropor -
tionately responsive to perturbations in wind- forced gas transfer. This 
regional dichotomy underscores how the relative dominance of ther-
modynamic and biogeochemical (dp) versus mechanical (kw) drivers 
shifts latitudinally, creating a mosaic of carbon sink- source sensitivities.
Temporally, the Southern Ocean exhibits comparable spatial 
footprints for k w- dominated and dp- dominated flux variability re-
gimes, each spanning ∼50% of the domain annually. A marked sea-
sonality governs these patterns: Gas transfer velocity (k w) peaks in 
influence during austral autumn (54% coverage in May), while pres-
sure difference forcing (dp) reaches maximal extent in summer (56% 
in December; Fig. 3B). Critically, our analysis reveals a multidecadal 
trend (2007–2020) wherein d p- controlled area expanded steadily 
from 51 to 60%, indicating a fundamental shift toward air- sea par-
tial pressure gradients as the principal modulator of Southern Ocean 
carbon flux variability.
Building on the Southern Ocean’s established climate linkages, we 
quantify how the SAM, the dominant extratropical climate mode, mod-
ulates CO2 flux dynamics through its dual control of gas transfer veloc-
ity (kw) and partial pressure gradient (dp). Detrended, deseasonalized 
analyses reveal SAM- index covariation with air- sea CO2 flux anom-
alies (Fig. 3C), where positive phases systematically reduce carbon 
uptake (or enhance outgassing), exemplified during 2008, 2010, and 
2015–2016. This reflects SAM’s wind- mediated forcing: Intensified 
westerlies during positive phases amplify Ekman- driven northward 
transport within the Antarctic Circumpolar Current’s southern flank 
(18, 34). The SAM- driven upwelling of DIC- enriched waters over-
whelms the biological pump’s sequestration capacity, triggering net 
CO2 outgassing, a mechanistic asymmetry most acute poleward of 
50°S. Connections emerge clearly in the observational record: Nega-
tive SAM states (e.g., 2009 and 2013) systematically strengthen the 
Southern Ocean’s carbon sink, while the high- latitude belt (50° to 
90°S) exhibits greater SAM- linked flux variability than subpolar 
zones, underscoring latitudinal gradients in air- sea coupling efficiency.
Mechanistic dissection of SAM’s flux modulation reveals divergent 
driver behaviors: The partial pressure gradient (dp) exhibits robust co-
variation with annular mode phases (Fig. 3D), where negative SAM 
states induce CO2 uptake surges following ~4- month lags (e.g., 2009 
and 2020), while positive phases drive near- synchronous oceanic out-
gassing (2010 and 2015–2018). Wind- mediated gas transfer velocity 
(kw) anomalies dynamically track SAM polarity (Fig. 3E), yet detrend-
ed analyses demonstrate that, compared to dp, kw has a substantially 
smaller interannual amplitude, exhibiting merely one- third the vari-
ability of dp forcing, establishing the former as the primary determi-
nant of net carbon flux sensitivity to annular mode variability.
These findings establish the SAM as a dual modulator of Southern 
Ocean carbon fluxes, operating through both physical (gas trans-
fer velocity, kw) and biogeochemical (partial pressure gradient, d p) 
pathways. The emergent dominance of d p variability, with its per -
sistent SAM covariance despite temporal lags, highlights climate-  
driven pCO2 redistribution as the sustained governor of regional 
Fig. 2. Sectoral and latitudinal breakdown of Southern Ocean air- sea CO2 fluxes. (A) Map defining the geographical boundaries of the Pacific (blue), Atlantic (yellow), 
and indian (red) sectors. the Pacific sector is defined as 147°e to 67°W, the Atlantic sector as 67°W to 20°e , and the indian sector as 20° to 147°e . (B and C) Monthly time 
series of integrated air- sea cO2 flux for the midlatitude (30° to 50°S) and high- latitude (50° to 90°S) zones, respectively. Stacked areas show contributions from each sector, 
and the solid black line is the total flux. i n (c), green shading highlights the austral winter period (June to October), when the high- latitude region becomes a net c O2 
source. Negative values signify ocean uptake

--- Page 5 ---
Zhang et al., Sci. Adv. 11, eaea0024 (2025)     5 November 2025
ScieNce Adv ANceS  |  ReSeAR ch AR ticle
5 of 12
carbon sequestration capacity. This mechanistic hierarchy proves 
most acute in the high- latitude Southern Ocean, where amplified 
sensitivity to annular mode variability cements the region’s dispro-
portionate influence on global carbon- climate coupling.
Control mechanisms of Southern Ocean pCO2
To elucidate the dominant controls on surface seawater partial pres-
sure of CO 2 (pCO 2), a prerequisite for resolving Southern Ocean 
carbon dynamics beyond flux variability driven by air- sea pCO2 
gradients (∆pCO 2), we applied random forest (RF) regression to 
quantify the relative influences of key environmental drivers across 
heterogeneous regimes. This analysis deconvolved contributions 
from sea surface temperature (SST), sea surface salinity (SSS), sea 
ice concentration (SIC), chlorophyll- a (Chl- a) concentration, mixed 
layer depth (MLD), sea surface height (SSH), sea surface wind speed 
(SSW), and atmospheric column- averaged dry- air mole fraction of 
carbon dioxide (xCO2) to observed spatiotemporal pCO2 variability.
Our analysis reveals distinct zonal patterns in pCO2 drivers, with 
dominant controls shifting progressively by latitude (Fig. 4A). Spa-
tial distributions of relative importance coefficients for primary and 
secondary controls appear in  Fig.  4B (top factors; white- masked 
where coefficients are <0.5) and Fig. 4C (secondary factors), with 
dashed lines approximating interregional boundaries. Synthesizing 
these patterns, we propose a “three- loop pattern” hypothesis, three 
latitudinally structured dynamic regimes (north to south), each de-
fined by unique primary and secondary controls (Fig. 4).
Subpolar loop (∼north of 45°S)
SST dominates as the primary control (highest importance; Fig. 4B), 
reflecting temperature- driven CO 2 solubility. Atmospheric xCO 2 
acts secondarily (Fig.  4C), modulating air- sea exchange via diffu-
sion/uptake. Warmer SST reduces CO2 uptake in northern subduc-
tion zones and alters outflow patterns where circulation or biology 
govern fluxes.
Polar front loop (∼45° to 60°S)
xCO2 is the primary driver (Fig. 4B), enhancing CO2 absorption and 
elevating surface pCO2. While high xCO2 may stimulate phytoplank-
ton growth, nutrient constraints limit this effect. Chlorophyll concen-
tration (Chl) emerges as the secondary control (Fig.  4C). Episodic 
blooms, fueled by upwelling and frontal dynamics, drive localized 
pCO2 drawdown, consistent with enhanced high- latitude productiv-
ity under elevated CO2 (35–37). Atmosphere- biology coupling gener-
ates complex feedback across sharp hydrographic transitions.
Antarctic loop (∼south of 60°S)
SSS dominates as the primary pCO2 control (Fig. 4B), modulating car-
bon chemistry via freshwater fluxes from precipitation and ice melt/
formation. SIC acts as the key secondary driver (Fig. 4C), governing 
Fig. 3. Spatiotemporal variability in CO2 flux drivers and their relationship with the SAM. (A) Spatial map of the dominant driver of c O2 flux variability, determined 
by the ratio of gas transfer velocity (k w) to the air- sea pcO2 difference (dp). Green indicates dp dominance; purple indicates k w dominance. (B) evolution of the fractional 
area controlled by kw versus dp (2007–2020). (C to E) comparison of the SAM index (pink/blue bars, 3- month running mean) with deseasoned and detrended anomalies 
in (c) net cO2 flux, (d) dp, and (e) kw.
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Nanjing Institute of Geography & Limnology on May 07, 2026


--- Page 6 ---
Zhang et al., Sci. Adv. 11, eaea0024 (2025)     5 November 2025
ScieNce Adv ANceS  |  ReSeAR ch AR ticle
6 of 12
Fig. 4. Spatial patterns of surface pCO2 drivers and the proposed three- loop framework. (A) latitudinal variation in the percentage contribution of key environmen-
tal drivers to surface pcO2 variability. (B and C) Spatial maps identifying the primary (B) and secondary (c) drivers of pcO2 variability. dashed lines delineate the approxi-
mate boundaries of the three proposed loops. i n (B), regions where the primary driver’s importance is below 50% are masked white. (D) Schematic of the proposed 
three- loop conceptual framework, illustrating the hypothesized dominant control mechanisms (loop 1: SSt, xcO2; loop 2: xcO2, chl- a; loop 3: Sic, SSS) within the context 
of the Southern Ocean’s meridional overturning circulation based on current data analysis.
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Nanjing Institute of Geography & Limnology on May 07, 2026


--- Page 7 ---
Zhang et al., Sci. Adv. 11, eaea0024 (2025)     5 November 2025
ScieNce Adv ANceS  |  ReSeAR ch AR ticle
7 of 12
gas exchange through ice- mediated diffusion barriers and light limita-
tion for photosynthesis during seasonal advance/retreat (38, 39). Ice 
retreat releases substantial iron to surface waters (40), establishing 
shallow stratification that triggers rapid ice- edge phytoplankton 
blooms (40, 41). This cryosphere- hydrography coupling, mediated by 
SSS and SIC, defines the loop’s carbon dynamics.
These regional controls operate within Southern Ocean circulation, 
where upwelling of carbon/nutrient- rich deep waters drives CO2 out-
gassing. Subsequent atmospheric modification (heating/freshening), 
northward Ekman transport, and subduction (e.g., Antarctic Intermedi-
ate Water formation) (42, 43) facilitate the source- to- sink transition 
during northward transport. Our three- loop framework resolves spatial 
pCO2 heterogeneity across this meridional overturning system (44–46).
The Southern Ocean’s carbon cycling systems exhibit distinct re-
sponses to rising atmospheric CO2: The Antarctic loop demonstrates 
sea ice–coupled regulation of air- sea CO2 fluxes, where ice- ocean dy-
namics dominate long- term variations; the polar front loop shows pro-
gressive narrowing of the ocean- atmosphere pCO2 gradient, suggesting 
potential conversion from a natural CO2 source to sink under sus-
tained CO2 increases; whereas the subpolar system transitions from 
temperature- driven seasonal pCO2 fluctuations to atmospheric CO2- 
dominated control, consequently amplifying its carbon sink capacity.
The proposed three- loop pattern establishes a mechanistic frame-
work explaining Southern Ocean pCO2 heterogeneity, revealing distinct 
hierarchical controls: Cryosphere- freshwater interactions dominate the 
Antarctic loop, air- sea- biological coupling governs the polar front loop, 
whereas solubility- mesoscale processes regulate the subpolar system 
(Fig. 4D). This integrated perspective clarifies regional feedback to 
climate variability and anthropogenic forcing, critical for projecting 
changes in the Southern Ocean’s global CO2 sink capacity. This three- 
loop schematic should be regarded as a conceptual model and working 
hypothesis that synthesizes current observations, which future studies 
are encouraged to test and refine.
Implications
Enabled by the unprecedented winter coverage of satellite LIDAR, 
our study makes two principal contributions: We reveal that winter 
CO2 outgassing south of 50°S was previously underestimated by up 
to 40%, and we propose a previously unknown “three- loop” frame-
work that mechanistically explains the latitudinal controls on sur -
face pCO2. These findings carry profound implications for our 
understanding of the Southern Ocean’s role in the global carbon 
cycle and for the future direction of climate research.
This work highlights the transformative advantage of active re-
mote sensing, specifically spaceborne LIDAR, for observing polar 
carbon cycles (47). Unlike passive optical instruments that fail during 
polar night and under persistent cloud cover, LIDAR provides direct, 
self- illuminated measurements, overcoming a fundamental barrier 
that has long biased our view of high- latitude systems. This capability 
is not limited to the Southern Ocean; other chronically undersam-
pled regions, such as the Arctic Ocean and cloudy equatorial zones, 
stand to benefit from the global deployment of LIDAR- based observ-
ing systems. Our study serves as a powerful proof- of- concept for a 
new era of ocean observation, paving the way for synergy with future 
satellite missions like the proposed Cloud- Aerosol LIDAR and Infra-
red Pathfinder Satellite Observations for Oceanography and Geosci-
ences Applications (CALIGOLA) (48) and Guanlan (49).
The consequences of rectifying the winter observational gap are 
profound. A weaker or more variable Southern Ocean carbon sink 
directly affects the global carbon budget assessments maintained by 
bodies like the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), 
potentially requiring adjustments to climate projections and nation-
al emission targets. By underestimating winter outgassing, previous 
analyses have not only miscalculated the net annual sink but also 
obscured the true seasonal dynamics. This introduces systematic er-
rors into Earth system models, which rely on observational data for 
calibration and validation, thereby compromising their ability to ac-
curately project future carbon- climate feedbacks.
Despite these advances, our methodology has limitations that 
warrant discussion. The primary constraint is the ongoing scarcity of 
in situ winter pCO2 measurements, which limits our ability to inde-
pendently validate satellite- derived fluxes across all high- latitude re-
gions. Furthermore, the current 1°- by- 1° spatial resolution of our 
product, while sufficient for basin- scale analysis, cannot resolve the 
mesosca

--- Page 8 ---
Zhang et al., Sci. Adv. 11, eaea0024 (2025)     5 November 2025
ScieNce Adv ANceS  |  ReSeAR ch AR ticle
8 of 12
from various platforms, including ships, moorings, and drifters. 
Our analysis focused on the period 2007–2020, which included 
92.53% of the database records, ensuring robust spatiotemporal 
coverage. The fCO2 values (in microatmosphere) were converted to 
partial pressure pCO2 values (in microatmosphere) using the stan-
dard formulation that accounts for the nonideal behavior of CO2 gas 
in seawater
In this equation, p represents the total atmospheric surface pres-
sure (in pascal) obtained from the National Centers for Environmen-
tal Prediction (NCEP) reanalysis, B and θ are the virial coefficients 
that depend on temperature and SSS, R is the universal gas constant, 
and T is the absolute SST (in kelvin).
Satellite LIDAR data and preprocessing (CALIOP)
To capture year- round ocean conditions, especially during polar 
winter, we used observations from the CALIOP instrument onboard 
the CALIPSO satellite. We processed 16,236 tracks of CALIOP 
Level- 1B V4.10 data (containing calibrated attenuated backscatter 
profiles at 532 nm) and Level- 2 Merged Layer V4.20 products ac-
quired between 2006 and 2023. In this study, we adopted a threshold 
of 120 m for surface determination, using the “Surface_Elevation” 
parameter from CALIOP Level 1 data, which is derived from the 
CloudSat science team digital elevation model and represents the 
surface elevation at the laser footprint above local mean sea level. 
CALIOP measures the intensity of backscattered light, separating it 
into components polarized parallel and perpendicular to the emitted 
laser pulse via a polarization beam splitter (PBS) and detecting these 
components with sensitive photomultiplier tubes.
The raw ocean backscatter signals require careful preprocessing 
to correct for instrument artifacts. First, the transient response of 
the detectors, which can cause signal overshoot after strong returns 
(like the ocean surface), was corrected via deconvolution via the in-
strument’s impulse response function matrix (27)
where β�(z) is the corrected backscatter signal, β(z) denotes the mea-
sured signal, and [F]−1 represents the transient response matrix (27). 
Second, imperfections in the PBS leading to polarization cross- talk 
were corrected via established coefficients applied to the transient- 
corrected parallel and perpendicular signals to yield the final cor -
rected signals via Eqs. 3 and 4
where β∥,c and β⊥,c are the cross- talk–corrected parallel and vertical 
signals, respectively; β∥,m and β⊥,m are the transient- corrected sig-
nals; and CT is the cross- talk coefficient (54).
From these corrected signals, the total column- integrated depolar-
ization ratio (δT) was calculated (55). The subsurface cross- polarized 
backscatter component, which is related to the concentration of sus-
pended particles and thus Chl- a, was derived via δT and an estimate of 
the LIDAR surface backscatter
where βW is the LIDAR surface backscatter estimated from the wind 
speed data (22, 24). To exclude sea ice and ensure data quality, only 
measurements with δT < 0.05 and integrated attenuated backscatter 
<0.017 sr−1 are retained, and the wind speed is constrained to 2 to 
9 m/s to minimize surface foam interference (24, 27).
LIDAR- derived Chl- a and supporting parameters
We used a specialized two- branch, two- step deep learning model to 
retrieve Chl- a, particulate backscatter (bbp), and the diffuse attenua-
tion coefficient (Kd) from the fully processed CALIOP LIDAR sig-
nals and derived parameters (56,  57). In our previous publication 
using CALIOP data, we validated LIDAR satellite- retrieved bbp, Kd, 
and Chl- a values using coincident Argo- based field measurements 
(58, 59). This model architecture combines a convolutional neural net-
work branch processing waveform data (22 variables) with a fully con-
nected layer branch processing physical parameters (δT and βW). The 
features from both branches are concatenated and passed through re-
gression layers via rectified linear unit activation functions (except for 
the final linear output layer) (60). The model is trained on 106 monthly 
match points (70% training, 15% validation/evaluation) and validated 
against BGC- Argo data (25- km2, 24- hour window), achieving high 
correlation (R = 0.85 to 0.95) and low root mean square deviation 
(RMSD). The model was optimized via the RMSprop algorithm (61) 
and trained/validated on a large dataset (106 monthly points) matched 
with satellite ocean color data and evaluated against independent 
BGC- Argo float data (within a 25- km, 24- hour window), which dem-
onstrated high accuracy (R = 0.85 to 0.95; low RMSD). Wind speed 
estimates, derived from the LIDAR surface return, were also gener-
ated as part of this processing pipeline. In addition, we used integrated 
passive remote sensing data and reanalyzed data, including physical 
drivers (SST, SS

--- Page 9 ---
Zhang et al., Sci. Adv. 11, eaea0024 (2025)     5 November 2025
ScieNce Adv ANceS  |  ReSeAR ch AR ticle
9 of 12
1) Baseline climatology generation: An initial FNN was trained 
to estimate the monthly climatological mean field of surface pCO 2. 
This network uses satellite- derived monthly averages of environ-
mental parameters, specifically, SST, SSS, Chl- a, MLD, and the at-
mospheric CO2 mole fraction (xCO2), as inputs, which are mapped 
against established global pCO 2 climatology data [e.g., Takahashi 
et al. (31)].
2) Anomaly reconstruction: A second FNN was trained to recon-
struct the monthly pCO 2 anomalies (deviations from the baseline 
climatology). This network used contemporaneous in  situ pCO 2 
measurements from observational databases (primarily SOCAT) 
along with the same suite of monthly environmental predictor vari-
ables used in the first step. This allows the model to capture real- 
world interannual variability and regional features not present in the 
long- term mean climatology.
The final gap- filled pCO2 estimate for any given month and loca-
tion is obtained by summing the outputs from the baseline climatol-
ogy network (step 1) and the anomaly reconstruction network (step 
2). The key innovation enabling year- round reconstruction, particu-
larly at high latitudes, is the integration of data derived from the 
CALIPSO satellite LIDAR within the FNN- LID framework. As de-
tailed previously (see the “Data acquisition and processing” sec-
tion), LIDAR provides unique day- night measurements related to 
Chl- a (via particulate backscatter) and SSW , which are crucially un-
affected by solar illumination limitations that cause large data gaps 
for passive ocean color sensors during polar winter. These LIDAR- 
derived Chl- a and wind speed data were incorporated as vital input 
predictor variables into the FNNs for both reconstruction steps. 
Their inclusion significantly enhances data availability during win-
ter darkness and cloudy conditions, thereby improving the robust-
ness and reliability of the reconstructed monthly mean pCO2 fields, 
especially in the challenging Southern Ocean environment.
To effectively capture the distinct seasonal cycles in pCO 2 dy -
namics, twelve independent FNN models were developed and 
trained, one for each calendar month. Each monthly model used a 
five- layer network architecture. The combined dataset of matched 
in situ pCO2 and predictor variables was partitioned into indepen-
dent subsets for training (50%), evaluation (25%), and final valida-
tion (25%). The performance and validation metrics of the resulting 
FNN- LID pCO2 product are detailed in the “Validation and uncer-
tainties” section below.
Air- sea CO2 flux calculation
The air- sea CO2 flux (F) is a critical component of the global carbon 
cycle and can be estimated via the partial pressure difference meth-
od, which relates the gradient in CO2 partial pressures between the 
ocean and atmosphere to the gas transfer velocity ( kw ) and the solu-
bility of CO 2 (sol) (67). We calculated F via the standard bulk gas 
flux formulation
where sol is a function of SST and SSS, which is calculated via em-
pirical formulations ( 68), and where kw is influenced by the wind 
speed, surface turbulence, and chemical enhancement (69). Wind 
speed is typically parameterized via quadratic or cubic relationships, 
with recent studies favoring wind speed–dependent parameteriza-
tions that account for variability in bubble- mediated transfer (70).
Uncertainties in flux estimates arise from spatial and temporal 
variability in pCO2_sea, measurement limitations, and the choice of 
gas exchange parameterization (31). Advances in autonomous sensors 
and satellite- based pCO2 products have improved spatiotemporal 
coverage, yet regional biases persist, particularly in high- latitude and 
coastal systems. To reduce errors, integrated approaches that combine 
in situ measurements, remote sensing, and biogeochemical models are 
increasingly used (71). The SIC modulates the hindrance of air- sea gas 
exchange via ice cover. To account for gas exchange through leads and 
fractures in the ice, SIC values exceeding 0.99 were capped at 0.99 
(72, 73). This method remains a cornerstone for understanding ocean- 
atmosphere carbon dynamics and their climate feedbacks.
To explore the spatial variability of the relative influence between 
the kw and dp, we computed their ratio, defined as
This ratio provides a normalized indicator of the balance be-
tween wind- driven gas exchange and partial pressure gradient. 
When t > 1, gas exchange in the region is predominantly controlled 
by wind- driven surface turbulence. In contrast, t  < 1 indicates that 
the partial pressure gradient of pCO2 between the ocean and atmo-
sphere exerts a stronger influence on the air- sea flux.
Validation and uncertainties of the sea- air CO2 
flux estimation
In this study, we validated the global estimates of pCO2 derived from 
the FNN- LID model a

--- Page 10 ---
Zhang et al., Sci. Adv. 11, eaea0024 (2025)     5 November 2025
ScieNce Adv ANceS  |  ReSeAR ch AR ticle
10 of 12
To further validate surface ocean pCO2 across different years, we 
calculate the annual mean bias (fig. S4D). Our reconstructed dataset 
shows no significant interannual bias trend, with the annual mean 
error consistently within ±0.2 μatm.
In polar regions, FNN- LID pCO2 estimates exhibited high qual-
ity in the Antarctic (RMSE of 22.3 μatm) compared with recent 
SOCAT- based global pCO2 fields (RMSEs of 26.7 μatm) and pro-
vided more accurate estimates for the polar continental shelf during 
winter (74). This advantage arises from the use of CALIPSO, which 
offers superior capabilities over traditional passive remote sensing 
systems [e.g., Sea- viewing Wide Field- of- view Sensor (SeaWiFS) or 
MODIS] in distinguishing between clouds and sea ice (75). Conse-
quently, the active satellite LIDAR input allows for continuous ob-
servations during the winter polar night, enabling high- coverage 
polar data (76). This LIDAR- enabled, year- round data stream pro-
vides unprecedented coverage, significantly boosting the reliability 
of our pCO 2 fields in the Southern Ocean, especially during the 
critical winter months when passive sensors fail. It should be noted 
that the validation is primarily constrained to regions and seasons 
with relatively dense SOCAT observations. In particular, winter and 
high- latitude estimates remain less well constrained, and future val-
idation efforts will benefit greatly from additional in situ measure-
ments, such as those provided by BGC- Argo floats.
In conclusion, the residual analysis confirms that the global 
FNN- LID method meets most criteria for a robust fit, with no sig-
nificant evidence of hidden biases. Notably, the estimates do not ex-
hibit any substantial degradation with respect to data density, either 
temporally or spatially. Regions with pronounced spatial or tempo-
ral variability show relatively weak fits, while the method excels in 
accurately estimating pCO2 for most open ocean regions character-
ized by lower variability. Globally, the FNN- LID model demonstrat-
ed an excellent fit with the gridded pCO 2 data from SOCATv2022, 
with an accuracy comparable to that of other recent models in terms 
of the mean monthly results. These findings further support the reli-
ability and effectiveness of the FNN- LID approach for global pCO2 
estimation. While uncertainties in gas transfer velocity parameter -
izations and other factors contribute to the overall flux uncertainty, 
the demonstrated accuracy and enhanced spatiotemporal coverage 
of our reconstructed pCO2 fields significantly reduce a major source 
of uncertainty, thereby increasing confidence in the resulting air- sea 
CO2 flux estimates presented in this study.
Driving factor analysis
Sea surface p CO2 is influenced by both air- sea interactions and 
basin- scale properties. Using a nonlinear RF approach, we quantified 
the relative contributions of eight factors to the spatiotemporal vari-
ability in pCO2 in the Southern Ocean. These factors include ocean 
dynamic variables (SSH, SSS, SIC, and SSW), biogeochemical drivers 
(Chl- a, MLD, and SST), and anthropogenic influences (x CO2). To 
interpret the spatial and temporal patterns of the air- sea CO2 flux, we 
normalized the relative contributions of these factors and calculated 
them to the basis of annual mean values. The dominant driver at each 
grid cell was identified as the factor with the highest contribution. 
The feature importance in the RF model was evaluated via the Gini 
importance index, which is selected over the permutation and Boruta 
indices because of its computational efficiency, suitability for large- 
scale analyses, and ease of interpretation (31). The Gini importance 
reflects the mean decrease in Gini impurity, computed as the nor -
malized sum of impurity reductions across all nodes. For each factor, 
its contribution ranges from 0 to 100%, with the total contributions 
of all eight factors summing to 100%.
Supplementary Materials
This PDF file includes:
Supplementary text
Figs. S1 to S4
table S1
REFERENCES AND NOTES
 1. S. Khatiwala, F. Primeau, t. hall, Reconstruction of the history of anthropogenic cO2 
concentrations in the ocean. Nature 462, 346–349 (2009).
 2. N. Gruber, P . landschützer, N. S. lovenduski, the variable Southern Ocean carbon sink. 
Ann. Rev. Mar. Sci. 11, 159–186 (2019).
 3. K. caldeira, P . B. duffy, the role of the Southern Ocean in uptake and storage of 
anthropogenic carbon dioxide. Science 287, 620–622 (2000).
 4. A. R. Gray, the four- dimensional carbon cycle of the Southern Ocean. Ann. Rev. Mar. Sci. 
16, 163–190 (2024).
 5. M. B. Mcelroy, Marine biological controls on atmospheric cO2 and climate. Nature 302, 
328–329 (1983).
 6. J. hauck, l. Gregor, c. Nissen, l. Patara, M. hague, P . Mongwe, S. Bushinsky, S. c. doney,  
N. Gruber, c. l. Quéré, M. Manizza, M. Mazloff, P . M. S. Mon

--- Page 11 ---
Zhang et al., Sci. Adv. 11, eaea0024 (2025)     5 November 2025
ScieNce Adv ANceS  |  ReSeAR ch AR ticle
11 of 12
 18. c. l. Quéré, c. Rödenbeck, e . t. Buitenhuis, t. J. conway, R. langenfelds, A. Gomez,  
c. labuschagne, M. Ramonet, t. Nakazawa, N. Metzl, N. Gillett, M. heimann, Saturation of 
the Southern Ocean cO2 sink due to recent climate change. Science 316, 1735–1738 
(2007).
 19. N. S. lovenduski, N. Gruber, S. c. doney, toward a mechanistic understanding of the decadal 
trends in the Southern Ocean carbon sink. Global Biogeochem. Cycles 22, GB3016 (2008).
 20. P . landschützer, N. Gruber, F. A. haumann, c. Rödenbeck, d. c. e. Bakker, S. van heuven, 
M. hoppema, N. Metzl, c. Sweeney, t. takahashi, B. tilbrook, R. Wanninkhof, the 
reinvigoration of the Southern Ocean carbon sink. Science 349, 1221–1224 (2015).
 21. l. Gregor, S. Kok, P . Monteiro, interannual drivers of the seasonal cycle of cO2 in the 
Southern Ocean. Biogeosciences 15, 2361–2378 (2018).
 22. Y. hu, K. Stamnes, M. vaughan, J. Pelon, c. Weimer, d. Wu, M. cisewski, W. Sun, P . Yang,  
B. lin, A. Omar, d. Flittner, c. hostetler, c. trepte, d. Winker, G. Gibson, M. Santa- Maria, Sea 
surface wind speed estimation from space- based lidar measurements.  
Atmos. Chem. Phys. 8, 3593–3601 (2008).
 23. Y. hu, d. Winker, M. vaughan, B. lin, A. Omar, c. trepte, d. Flittner, P . Yang, S. l. Nasiri,  
B. Baum, R. holz, W. Sun, Z. liu, Z. Wang, S. Young, K. Stamnes, J. huang, R. Kuehn, 
cAliPSO/cAliOP cloud phase discrimination algorithm. J. Atmos. Oceanic Tech. 26, 
2293–2309 (2009).
 24. M. J. Behrenfeld, Y. hu, c. A. hostetler, G. dall'Olmo, S. d. Rodier, J. W. hair, c. R. trepte, 
Space- based lidar measurements of global ocean carbon stocks. Geophys. Res. Lett. 40, 
4355–4360 (2013).
 25. M. J. Behrenfeld, P . Gaube, A. della Penna, R. t. O'Malley, W. J. Burt, Y. hu, P . S. Bontempi,  
d. K. Steinberg, e. S. Boss, d. A. Siegel, c. A. hostetler, P . d. tortell, S. c. doney, Global 
satellite- observed daily vertical migrations of ocean animals. Nature 576, 257–261 (2019).
 26. d . Winker, J. Pelon, J. coakley Jr., S. Ackerman, R. charlson, P . colarco, P . Flamant, Q. Fu,  
R. hoff, c. Kittaka, t. l. Kubar, h. le treut, M. P . Mccormick, G. Mégie, l. Poole, K. Powell,  
c. trepte, M. A. vaughan, B. A. Wielicki, the cAliPSO mission: A global 3d view of aerosols 
and clouds. Bull. Am. Meteorol. Soc. 91, 1211–1230 (2010).
 27. X. lu, Y. hu, c. trepte, S. Zeng, J. h. churnside, Ocean subsurface studies with the 
cAliPSO spaceborne lidar. J. Geophys. Res. Oceans 119, 4305–4317 (2014).
 28. J. h. churnside, B. J. Mccarty, X. lu, Subsurface ocean signals from an orbiting 
polarization lidar. Remote Sens 5, 3457–3475 (2013).
 29. M. J. Behrenfeld, Y. hu, R. t. O’Malley, e. S. Boss, c. A. hostetler, d. A. Siegel, J. l. Sarmiento, 
J. Schulien, J. W. hair, X. lu, S. Rodier, A. J. Scarino, Annual boom–bust cycles of polar 
phytoplankton biomass revealed by space- based lidar. Nat. Geosci. 10, 118–122 (2017).
 30. K. Bisson, e. Boss, P . Werdell, A. ibrahim, M. Behrenfeld, Particulate backscattering in the 
global ocean: A comparison of independent assessments. Geophys. Res. Lett. 48, 
e2020Gl090909 (2021).
 31. t . takahashi, S. c. Sutherland, R. Wanninkhof, c. Sweeney, R. A. Feely, d. W. chipman,  
B. hales, G. Friederich, F. chavez, c. Sabine, A. Watson, d. c. e. Bakker, U. Schuster,  
N. Metzl, h. Yoshikawa- inoue, M. ishii, t. Midorikawa, Y. Nojiri, A. Körtzinger, t. Steinhoff, 
M. hoppema, J. Olafsson, t. S. Arnarson, B. tilbrook, t. Johannessen, A. Olsen, R. Bellerby, 
c. S. Wong, B. delille, N. R. Bates, h. J. W. de Baar, climatological mean and decadal 
change in surface ocean pcO2, and net sea–air cO2 flux over the global oceans.  
Deep- Sea Res. II Top. Stud. Oceanogr. 56, 554–577 (2009).
 32. P . landschützer, N. Gruber, d. c. Bakker, decadal variations and trends of the global 
ocean carbon sink. Global Biogeochem. Cycles 30, 1396–1417 (2016).
 33. N. Gruber, d. c. e. Bakker, t. devries, l. Gregor, J. hauck, P . landschützer, G. A. McKinley,  
J. d. Müller, trends and variability in the ocean carbon sink. Nat. Rev. Earth Environ. 4, 
119–134 (2023).
 34. N. S. lovenduski, N. Gruber, S. c. doney, i. d. lima, enhanced cO2 outgassing in the 
Southern Ocean from a positive phase of the Southern Annular Mode.  
Global Biogeochem. Cycles 21, (2007).
 35. J. hauck, c. völker, d. A. Wolf- Gladrow, c. laufkötter, M. vogt, O. Aumont, l. Bopp,  
e. t. Buitenhuis, S. c. doney, J. dunne, N. Gruber, t. hashioka, J. John, c. l. Quéré,  
i. d. lima, h. Nakano, R. Séférian, i. totterdell, On the Southern Ocean cO2 uptake and the 
role of the biological carbon pump in the 21st century. Global Biogeochem. Cycles 29, 
1451–1470 (2015).
 36. J. K. Moore, W. Fu, F. Primeau, G. l. Britten, K. lindsay, M. long, S. c. doney, N. Mahowald, 
F. hoffman, J. t. Randerson, Sustained climate warming drives declining marine biological 
productivity. Science 359, 1139–1143 (

--- Page 12 ---
Zhang et al., Sci. Adv. 11, eaea0024 (2025)     5 November 2025
ScieNce Adv ANceS  |  ReSeAR ch AR ticle
12 of 12
 66. S. Zhang, P . chen, Y. hu, Z. Zhang, c. Jamet, X. lu, d. dionisi, d. Pan, diurnal global ocean 
surface pcO2 and air–sea cO2 flux reconstructed from spaceborne lidAR data.  
PNAS Nexus 3, pgad432 (2024).
 67. R. Wanninkhof, G.- h. Park, t. takahashi, c. Sweeney, R. Feely, Y. Nojiri, N. Gruber,  
S. c. doney, G. A. McKinley, A. lenton, Global ocean carbon uptake: Magnitude, variability 
and trends. Biogeosciences 10, 1983–2000 (2013).
 68. R. F. Weiss, carbon dioxide in water and seawater: the solubility of a non- ideal gas.  
Mar. Chem. 2, 203–215 (1974).
 69. P . d. Nightingale, G. Malin, c. S. law, A. J. Watson, P . S. liss, M. i. liddicoat, J. Boutin,  
R. c. Upstill- Goddard, in situ evaluation of air- sea gas exchange parameterizations using 
novel conservative and volatile tracers. Global Biogeochem. Cycles 14, 373–387 (2000).
 70. d . t. ho, c. S. law, M. J. Smith, P . Schlosser, M. harvey, P . hill, Measurements of air- sea gas 
exchange at high wind speeds in the Southern Ocean: implications for global 
parameterizations. Geophys. Res. Lett. 33, e2006Gl026817 (2006).
 71. c. Rödenbeck, R. F. Keeling, d . c. Bakker, N. Metzl, A. Olsen, c. Sabine, M. heimann, Global 
surface- ocean pCO2 and sea–air cO2 flux variability from an observation- driven ocean 
mixed- layer scheme. Ocean Sci. 9, 193–216 (2013).
 72. J. Prytherch, i. M. Brooks, P . M. crill, B. F. thornton, d. J. Salisbury, M. tjernström,  
l. G. Anderson, M. c. Geibel, c. humborg, direct determination of the air- sea cO2 gas 
transfer velocity in Arctic sea ice regions. Geophys. Res. Lett. 44, 3770–3778 (2017).
 73. i. Semiletov, A. Makshtas, S. i. Akasofu, e . l. Andreas, Atmospheric cO2 balance: the role 
of Arctic sea ice. Geophys. Res. Lett. 31, l05121 (2004).
 74. S. Zhang, P . chen, Z. Zhang, d. Pan, carbon air–sea flux in the Arctic Ocean from cAliPSO 
from 2007 to 2020. Remote Sens 14, 6196 (2022).
 75. M. Babin, K. Arrigo, S. Bélanger, M.- h. Forget, Ocean Colour Remote Sensing in Polar Seas 
(iOccG, 2015).
 76. Y. liu, S. A. Ackerman, B. c. Maddux, J. R. Key, R. A. Frey, errors in cloud detection over the 
Arctic using a satellite imager and implications for observing feedback mechanisms.  
J. Climate 23, 1894–1907 (2010).
Acknowledgments: We acknowledge NASA, SOcAt, european centre for Medium Range 
Weather Forecasts, NceP , and copernicus Marine environment Monitoring Service for 
providing in situ pcO2 data and satellite and reanalysis data. Funding: this study was 
supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of china (grant no. 42425102 to K.S.; 
grant no. 42322606; grant no. 42276180; grant no. W2521002 to P .c.; and grant no. 4240060663 
to S.Z.), Zhejiang Provincial Natural Science Foundation (grant no. lZ25d060001 to P .c.), and 
National Key Research and development Program of china (grant no. 2022YFB3901703; and 
grant no. 2022YFB3902603 to P .c.). Author contributions: S.Z., P .c., and K.S. conceived the 
study and prepared the original manuscript. Z.Z., S.Z., and d.P . provided parts of data. K.B., c.J., 
P .d.G., d.d., and Y.h. prepared and/or revised the manuscript. Competing interests: the 
authors declare that they have no competing interests. Data and materials availability: All 
data needed to evaluate the conclusions in the paper are present in the paper and/or the 
Supplementary Materials as well as from Zenodo at https://zenodo.org/records/16959375.
Submitted 23 June 2025 
Accepted 6 October 2025 
Published 5 November 2025 
10.1126/sciadv.aea0024
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Nanjing Institute of Geography & Limnology on May 07, 2026


--- Page 13 ---
Substantially underestimated winter CO2 sources of the Southern Ocean
Siqi Zhang, Peng Chen, Kelsey Bisson, Cédric Jamet, Paolo Di Girolamo, Davide Dionisi, Yongxiang Hu, Zhenhua Zhang,
Kun Shi, and Delu Pan
Sci. Adv. 11 (45), eaea0024.  DOI: 10.1126/sciadv.aea0024
View the article online
https://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/sciadv.aea0024
Permissions
https://www.science.org/help/reprints-and-permissions
Use of this article is subject to the Terms of service
Science Advances (ISSN 2375-2548) is published by the American Association for the Advancement of Science. 1200 New York Avenue
NW, Washington, DC 20005. The title Science Advances is a registered trademark of AAAS. 
Copyright © 2025 The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive licensee American Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim
to original U.S. Government Works. Distributed under a Creative Commons Attribution NonCommercial License 4.0 (CC BY-NC).
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Nanjing Institute of Geography & Limnology on May 07, 2026


